SUSTAINABILITY
REPORT
Royal Dutch Shell plc
Sustainability Report 2015

CONTENTS

01
INTRODUCTION

30
OUR PERFORMANCE

01 Introduction from the CEO
02 Topic selection for 2015
04 About Shell
06 How sustainability works at Shell
08 Sustainability governance
09	Embedding sustainability
into projects

31
34
38
41

10
THE ENERGY TRANSITION

43
44
45
46
47
47
48
49

11
13
16
17
18
19
20

The energy future
Addressing climate change
Natural gas
Liquefied natural gas
Research and development
Carbon capture and storage
Lower-carbon alternatives

22
MANAGING OPERATIONS
Cover image
Shell is supporting a global energy
transition to a low-carbon future.
We invest in areas such as carbon
capture and storage, biofuels and
hydrogen as a transport fuel.

New Lens Scenarios
This publication contains data from Shell’s New Lens
Scenarios. The New Lens Scenarios are a part of an
ongoing process used in Shell for 40 years to challenge
executives’ perspectives on the future business environment.
We base them on plausible assumptions and quantifications,
and they are designed to stretch management to consider
even events that may only be remotely possible. Scenarios,
therefore, are not intended to be predictions of likely future
events or outcomes and investors should not rely on them
when making an investment decision with regard to
Royal Dutch Shell plc securities.

Cautionary note
The companies in which Royal Dutch Shell plc directly and
indirectly owns investments are separate legal entities.
In this report, “Shell”, “Shell group” and “Royal Dutch Shell”
are sometimes used for convenience where references
are made to Royal Dutch Shell plc and its subsidiaries in
general. Likewise, the words “we”, “us” and “our” are also
used to refer to subsidiaries in general or to those who work
for them. These expressions are also used where no useful
purpose is served by identifying the particular company
or companies. “Subsidiaries”, “Shell subsidiaries” and
“Shell companies” as used in this publication refer to
companies over which Royal Dutch Shell plc either directly
or indirectly has control. Entities and unincorporated
arrangements over which Shell has joint control are
generally referred to as “joint ventures” and “joint
operations” respectively. Entities over which Shell has
significant influence but neither control nor joint control
are referred to as “associates”. The term “Shell interest”
is used for convenience to indicate the direct and/or
indirect (for example, through our 23% shareholding
in Woodside Petroleum Ltd.) ownership interest held by
Shell in a venture, partnership or company, after exclusion
of all third-party interest.

23
24
26
27
28
29

Our activities in Alaska
Our activities in Nigeria
Tight gas and oil
Managing methane emissions
Flaring
Oil sands

This report contains forward-looking statements
concerning the financial condition, results of operations
and businesses of Royal Dutch Shell. All statements other
than statements of historical fact are, or may be deemed
to be, forward-looking statements. Forward-looking
statements are statements of future expectations that
are based on management’s current expectations and
assumptions and involve known and unknown risks and
uncertainties that could cause actual results, performance
or events to differ materially from those expressed or
implied in these statements. Forward-looking statements
include, among other things, statements concerning the
potential exposure of Royal Dutch Shell to market risks and
statements expressing management’s expectations, beliefs,
estimates, forecasts, projections and assumptions. These
forward-looking statements are identified by their use of
terms and phrases such as “anticipate”, “believe”, “could”,
“estimate”, “expect”, “goals”, “intend”, “may”, “objectives”,
“outlook”, “plan”, “probably”, “project”, “risks”, “schedule”,
“seek”, “should”, “target”, “will” and similar terms and
phrases. There are a number of factors that could affect
the future operations of Royal Dutch Shell and could cause
those results to differ materially from those expressed in
the forward-looking statements included in this report,
including (without limitation): (a) price fluctuations in
crude oil and natural gas; (b) changes in demand for
Shell’s products; (c) currency fluctuations; (d) drilling and
production results; (e) reserves estimates; (f) loss of market
share and industry competition; (g) environmental and
physical risks; (h) risks associated with the identification
of suitable potential acquisition properties and targets,
and successful negotiation and completion of such
transactions; (i) the risk of doing business in developing
countries and countries subject to international sanctions;
(j) legislative, fiscal and regulatory developments including
regulatory measures addressing climate change;
(k) economic and financial market conditions in various
countries and regions; (l) political risks, including the risks

Safety
Environment
Working with communities
Shell Foundation

42
WORKING TOGETHER
Living by our principles
Environmental and social partners
Collaborations
Contractors and suppliers
Joint ventures
Our people
Economic performance
Tax and transparency

50
DATA AND REPORTING
51
52
53
54
56

About our reporting
Environmental data
Social and safety data
External Review Committee
Links

of expropriation and renegotiation of the terms of contracts
with governmental entities, delays or advancements in
the approval of projects and delays in the reimbursement
for shared costs; and (m) changes in trading conditions.
All forward-looking statements contained in this report
are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary
statements contained or referred to in this section. Readers
should not place undue reliance on forward-looking
statements. Additional risk factors that may affect
future results are contained in Royal Dutch Shell’s 20-F
for the year ended December 31, 2015 (available at
www.shell.com/investor and www.sec.gov). These
risk factors also expressly qualify all forward-looking
statements contained in this report and should be
considered by the reader. Each forward-looking statement
speaks only as of the date of this report, 18 April 2016.
Neither Royal Dutch Shell plc nor any of its subsidiaries
undertake any obligation to publicly update or revise any
forward-looking statement as a result of new information,
future events or other information. In light of these risks,
results could differ materially from those stated, implied
or inferred from the forward-looking statements contained
in this report.
We may have used certain terms, such as resources,
in this report that the United States Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) strictly prohibits us from
including in our filings with the SEC. US investors are
urged to consider closely the disclosure in our
Form 20-F, File No 1-32575, available on the SEC
website www.sec.gov.

INTRODUCTION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

INTRODUCTION FROM THE CEO

“I believe that greater
co-operation across
society is needed
for a successful
energy transition.”
It was a significant year for the global community in 2015 with the adoption of the
historic Paris Agreement by 195 countries demonstrating a commitment to bring about
a lower-carbon energy system.
The year also presented Shell with a difficult business
environment. A low oil price meant making some
tough choices about our long-term investments.
As we continue on this path, I am determined that
operating our business responsibly – with respect
for people, their safety, communities and the
environment – remains a priority. Sustainability, for
me, is essential to our responsible operation and to
being a valued and respected member of society.

IMPROVING OUR OPERATIONS

At Shell, we have long had a strong focus on safety
and, in 2015, our safety performance improved in
many areas. However, seven people lost their lives
at our operations in Nigeria. This deeply saddens
me and my thoughts are with the families of those
involved. Incidents like these are simply unacceptable.
We made progress in our environmental
performance: spills were reduced by around
30% while our total greenhouse gas emissions
decreased. We are also making headway to end
continuous flaring by 2030, which helps to reduce
our methane and carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions.
Another achievement was the start of Quest –
our carbon capture and storage (CCS) project
in Alberta, Canada – that is designed to capture
up to 1 million tonnes of CO2 a year from our oil
sands operations.

THE ENERGY LANDSCAPE

The shift to a low-carbon energy system is critical
but will take time. The meeting of states at COP 21
in Paris at the end of 2015 has set the ambition
to limit the increase in global temperature to
under 2 °C, even if countries move at different
paces to achieve their targets. Long-term solutions
probably include a hybrid of energy sources
where countries will rely on a combination
of renewable energy, hydrocarbons and CCS.

We all need to take steps to achieve a sustainable
world economy. To achieve a low-carbon society,
three main areas must be addressed. Firstly,
the world needs to become more energy efficient.
This means adopting fundamentally different
approaches in areas such as city planning,
infrastructure and transport, and better energy
efficiency standards. Secondly, there is a need for
more renewable energy in the system, working in
combination with gas to provide reliable electricity.
This involves significantly increasing the use of
electricity, including providing electricity to the
1.1 billion people who currently do not have
access. Thirdly, the world needs to reduce
the carbon intensity of the fossil-fuel share
of the energy system.
Today, fossil fuels meet more than 80% of global
energy needs. This share will be reduced over time
but hydrocarbons will remain a substantial part
of the world energy system in the coming decades.
Renewable energy sources have a key role to play
and should, in future, provide a large part of the
world’s electricity demand. But electricity is only
a part of our energy system: today it accounts
for almost 20% of total energy use. There are still
many areas that cannot be met by renewables
alone – such as the chemicals used to make
so many everyday products.

SUPPORTING THE
ENERGY TRANSITION

Shell can presently best support the transition
to a lower-carbon world by working to reduce
carbon in the energy system. We urge countries
and industries to make the switch from coal
to lower-carbon natural gas and we share
our knowledge of CCS technologies to keep
CO2 out of the atmosphere. We also invest
in hydrogen and advanced biofuels as
transport fuels.

We continue to work to reduce our own
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions over the long
term. A screening value for GHG is included
in our planned projects to inform our investment
choices. Natural gas already makes up about
half of the energy we supply. The acquisition
of BG Group in 2016 brings more gas to our
production. It is likely that over the next few
decades, through the global energy transition,
Shell will emerge as a different company.

WORKING TOGETHER

Governments can also make choices that enable
the transition: we support energy policies that
incentivise businesses and consumers to choose
low-carbon options. I believe that greater
co-operation across society is needed for a
successful energy transition. More cross-sector
coalitions – where business, government and
civil society work effectively together – will
accelerate the pace. The Energy Transitions
Commission, of which Shell is a founding
partner, brings together leading individuals from
the public, private and social sectors to make
recommendations that will contribute to the
energy transition.
Our Sustainability Report details our activities
during 2015. I would like to thank the members
of the External Review Committee, consisting of
leading sustainability experts, for their input to
the report this year. They play an important role
in developing our reporting and our thinking
on sustainability. We were a founding member
of the UN Global Compact and continue to
support its 10 principles.

Ben van Beurden
Chief Executive Officer

01

INTRODUCTION

02

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

TOPIC SELECTION FOR 2015
The Shell Sustainability Report 2015 focuses on the key sustainability challenges the company
faces and explores the many ways that we are responding. The topic selection identifies the
sustainability subjects that were relevant or prominent in 2015.
Each year, we use a structured process to
select the report’s content and confirm its validity.
We engage with various groups and individuals
to understand specific concerns about our
business and its impacts around the world,
particularly in relation to the environment
and society.
This includes speaking with community
representatives, business partners, customers,
non-governmental organisations, investors,
shareholders, the media, academics, contractors
and suppliers, rating agencies and members
of the public. We also talk to teams within Shell.
All opinions and advice are gathered in various
ways including formal and informal meetings,
workshops and online surveys.

The main steps involved in selecting the topics
are (see diagram):
Step 1: identifying and understanding topics that
are important to our stakeholders;
Step 2: identifying topics that are important
to Shell’s business strategy;
Step 3: collating all the topics identified as of
high importance by our stakeholders – these
topics determine the report’s content;
Step 4: identifying the topics for 2015 that will be
covered on www.shell.com rather than in the report;
Step 5: submitting details of the topic selection
process for review and approval by the External
Review Committee to ensure that coverage is
balanced, relevant and complete (see page 54);
and
Step 6: informing Shell’s Executive Committee of
the chosen topics.

TOPIC SELECTION DIAGRAM

External Review Committee’s previous
opinion letter
Civil society dialogues
Stakeholder relations review
Global media review
Investor feedback and indexes
Reader feedback and social media
Reputation tracker survey
Website visits
Report reviews by specialist organisations

Resulting topics are considered in their
broader sustainability context based on:
World Energy Outlook
WBCSD Vision 2050 report
Shell business environment outlook
Sustainability reporting guidelines and standards
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Fifth Assessment Report

INCLUDED ON
WWW.SHELL.COM

Financial risks
Reputation risks
Sustainability priorities
Key projects

We have listed the selected topics in alphabetical
order rather than prioritising them. The topics
consistently ranked as of high importance in 2015
are energy transition and climate change; we have
a section dedicated to these topics.
We report in accordance with the Global Reporting
Initiative (GRI) version G4 and in line with the oil
and gas industry guidelines developed by IPIECA
– the global oil and gas industry association for
environmental and social issues. We also use the
guidance on voluntary reporting from the American
Petroleum Institute and the International Association
of Oil and Gas Producers.
The GRI content index is available on our company
website, www.shell.com. Shell supports the United
Nations Global Compact and its 10 principles
covering human rights, labour, the environment and
anti-corruption. Sections of this sustainability report
cover Shell’s performance in 2015 across these
areas. We also follow the progress of the United
Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals through
our membership of IPIECA.
More detailed information about Shell’s approach
to sustainability, our processes and work around
the world, is available on www.shell.com. Links
to specific information on topics discussed in
the report are published on page 56.

INTRODUCTION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ARCTIC
Alaska
Community relations
■■ Environmental initiatives
■■ Science
Page 23

LOCAL COMMUNITIES AND
SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT

■■
■■

PARTNERS AND COLLABORATIONS
■■

■■
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■

Community engagement Page 38
Human rights Page 43
Local content Pages 40 and 46
Our performance Page 40
Resettlement Page 39
Social investment Page 40

■■
■■
■■

Collaborations Page 45
Joint ventures Page 47
Partnerships Page 44
Trade associations Page 45

NIGERIA
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■

Education Page 25
Flaring Page 28
Oil spills & remediation Pages 24 and 36
Social investment Page 25
Security Page 24

SAFETY

BUSINESS ETHICS, TRANSPARENCY
AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
■■
■■
■■
■■

■■
■■

Business integrity Page 43
Executive scorecard Page 48
Governance Page 08
Revenue transparency Page 49

■■
■■
■■

■■

CLIMATE CHANGE & ENERGY FUTURE
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■

Carbon pricing Page 14
Carbon capture and storage Page 19
Climate change policy and risks Pages 13 to 15
Energy efficiency Pages 15 and 36
Lower-carbon alternatives Pages 20 and 21
Natural gas Pages 16 and 17
Our performance Pages 27 and 36

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■
■■

Biodiversity and green infrastructure Page 34
Decommissioning Page 35
Environmental policy Page 34
Flaring Page 28
Methane Page 27
Our performance Pages 36 and 37
Tight gas and oil Page 26

■■

OIL SANDS
First Nations
■■ Greenhouse gas emissions
■■ Tailings
■■ Water usage
Page 29

Deep water Page 32
Groningen Page 33
Our performance Page 33
Personal safety Page 31
Process safety & emergency response
Page 31
Road safety Pages 32 and 39
Security Page 33

SUPPLY CHAIN

■■

Contractor management
Human rights
■■ Local content and procurement
Page 46
■■
■■

TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION
■■
■■
■■

Advanced biofuels Page 20
Lower-carbon alternatives Pages 20 and 21
Research & development Page 18

PEOPLE
■■
■■
■■
■■

Human rights Page 43
Labour practices Pages 43 and 46
Our people Page 47
Worker welfare Pages 43 and 46

03

INTRODUCTION

04

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ABOUT SHELL
Royal Dutch Shell plc is an integrated international energy company with expertise in the
production, refining and marketing of oil and natural gas.

REFINING OIL INTO
FUELS AND LUBRICANTS

DEVELOPING
FIELDS

EXPLORING FOR
OIL AND GAS:
ONSHORE AND
OFFSHORE

PRODUCING
OIL AND GAS

EXTRACTING
BITUMEN

PRODUCING
PETROCHEMICALS

LIQUEFYING GAS
BY COOLING (LNG)

CONVERTING GAS INTO
LIQUID PRODUCTS (GTL)

UPGRADING BITUMEN

PRODUCING BIOFUELS

GENERATING POWER

You will see some of the icons from the
diagram throughout the report, to identify
in which part of the business the described
activities take place.

SHIPPING
AND TRADING

REGASIFYING (LNG)

SUPPLY AND
DISTRIBUTION

INTRODUCTION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

Shell is one of the world’s largest independent
oil and gas companies in terms of market
capitalisation, operating cash flow and production.
Our business explores for gas and oil worldwide,
both from conventional fields and from sources
such as tight rock and shale.
We work to develop new oil and gas supplies,
and have a global network of refineries and
chemical plants. We also transport and trade oil,
gas and other energy-related products and serve
around 25 million customers a day through our
global network of 43,000 branded retail sites.
Shell invests in alternative energy as well as
biofuels production and retail.
In early 2016, we reorganised our upstream
activities into Upstream and Integrated Gas.

UPSTREAM

Upstream explores for and recovers crude oil,
natural gas and natural gas liquids, transports oil
and gas, and operates the upstream and midstream
infrastructure necessary to deliver oil and gas to
market. The Upstream organisation co-ordinates
all of Shell’s conventional oil and gas businesses,
including our deep-water operations. Upstream
also includes our heavy oil and shale activities.

INTEGRATED GAS

Integrated Gas (IG) manages most of Shell’s
conventional natural gas operations, including
the manufacture and distribution of liquefied natural
gas (LNG) and gas-to-liquids products. The division
includes IG’s marketing, development and trading
activities to bring natural gas to our customers
around the world; it also includes our wind activities.
Establishing IG as a stand-alone business reflects
its further potential for growth.

DOWNSTREAM

Shell’s Downstream business manages Shell’s
refining and marketing activities for oil products
and chemicals. It is divided into five core
businesses: refining, retail, chemicals, lubricants,
and trading and supply. In Downstream, we
convert oil and gas resources into valuable
products, and market and sell them around the
world. Downstream also oversees Shell’s interests
in trading, shipping and low-carbon fuels,
including biofuels.

93,000

PROJECTS & TECHNOLOGY

Countries in which Shell operates

Shell Projects & Technology (P&T) provides technical
services, technology capability and major project
delivery across both Upstream and Downstream
activities. P&T drives research and innovation to
create technologies for finding and developing
oil and gas. P&T also provides leadership in
contracting and procurement, as well as in safety,
environmental and carbon dioxide management.

Average number of people employed
by Shell

70+

3

MILLION

Shell’s oil and gas production in barrels
of oil equivalent a day

BG GROUP

In April 2015, Shell announced an offer
for BG Group plc and the transaction was
completed on February 15, 2016. It should add
significantly to our business, particularly in LNG
worldwide and deep-water oil and gas in Brazil.
BG Group’s activities will be included in our
next sustainability report.

2%
Our approximate share of world oil production

9%
Shell’s approximate share of LNG sold across
the world in 2015

1%
Our share of the global supply of energy

05

06

INTRODUCTION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

HOW SUSTAINABILITY WORKS AT SHELL
Sustainability at Shell means providing energy in a responsible way, in a manner that respects
people and communities, their safety and the environment.
Our approach to sustainability stems from our
goal to manage and grow a safe, efficient and
profitable business. Shell’s core values of honesty,
integrity and respect for people – first laid out in the
Shell General Business Principles nearly 40 years
ago – underpin everything we do. A commitment
to contribute to sustainable development was
added in the late 1990s. These principles apply
to the way we do business and to our conduct
with the communities where we operate.

INTEGRATING SUSTAINABILITY

When we invest in energy projects, we seek to
balance the short- and long-term interests of our
business. For investment decisions, we consider
the economic, social and environmental risks and
opportunities as well as the political and technical.
Our commitment to safety, the environment and to
communities plays a crucial role in how we plan,
design and operate projects.

Today, the energy transition presents opportunities
to develop new ways of producing, distributing
and consuming energy. As part of our strategy,
we intend to make investments in large-scale and
commercial forms of lower-carbon technology
and energy, such as natural gas, carbon capture
and storage, biofuels, wind and solar energy.
We continue to develop advanced biofuels and
hydrogen-based fuels for electric transport and
energy storage. We also collaborate with others
to support the transition – for example, we are
part of the World Bank’s coalition to support
governmental carbon-pricing mechanisms.

Shell’s long-term success relies on our ability to
provide the energy and related products people
need, in a way that is competitive and socially
and environmentally responsible.

Helping to shape a more sustainable
energy future

At Shell, we believe the world needs to produce
more energy and emit less greenhouse gases if
society is to meet its development and environmental
goals – achieving these goals requires an energy
transition. We have acknowledged man-made
climate change for many years and called for action
by our industry, governments and energy customers.

Sharing wider benefits where we operate

The long-term nature of the energy industry means
that we can be part of a community for decades.
An open dialogue with communities is fundamental
to the way we operate – it helps us to identify
INTEGRATING SUSTAINABILITY

Helping to shape a more
sustainable energy future

Sharing wider benefits
where we operate

Running a safe, efficient,
responsible and profitable
business

any environmental and social opportunities and
challenges. We have teams that work closely
with communities throughout a project’s lifetime
to listen to and address people’s concerns.
(See page 9).
We also help to develop local economies
by creating jobs, sourcing from local suppliers,
supporting business development, and paying
taxes and royalties. In China, for example,
99% of Shell’s more than 20,000 employees
and contractors are Chinese. Our social
investment programmes aim to improve road
safety, access to energy and encourage local
enterprise where we operate. (See page 39).

Running a safe, efficient, responsible
and profitable business

Safeguarding and respecting people – our
employees, contractors and neighbours – is
fundamental to how we conduct business. We
aim to continuously improve the way we operate
to prevent incidents, and identify and minimise
adverse impacts at our projects and facilities.
We report publicly on our performance using
a range of indicators.
We share our experience in sustainability
by working with trade associations and
others to improve operational standards and
practices in safety, community engagement
and environmental management.
(See pages 44 and 45).

INTRODUCTION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

REPORTING AGAINST ASPIRATIONS

This table represents a selection of global metrics that we track within Shell. It helps us assess our performance as we continue to integrate sustainability
across our business. It shows our goals and progress in 2015 and our focus for 2016.
For example, Goal Zero was introduced for personal safety in 2007. Since then, we have broadened the goal to aim for no harm to people and the environment
across our business. More information on our performance, definitions of the indicators and the referenced goals are provided on pages 52 and 53.

GOALS, PERFORMANCE AND PLANS FOR 2016 AND BEYOND
2015 goal: achieve total recordable case
frequency (TRCF) below 1.13 for employees
and contractors.

2015 goal: achieve a number of operational
leaks below 65 (classified as “Operational
Process Safety Tier 1 events”).

2015 goal: achieve operational spills below
a volume of 1.2 (‘000 tonnes) (Classified
as “hydrocarbons reaching soil or water”).

SOCIAL

GHG & ENERGY

GHG & ENERGY

PROCESS SAFETY

Goal Zero has been our ambition for personal
safety since 2007.

ENVIRONMENT

PERSONAL
SAFETY

Goals

Since 2011, we have extended our ambition
of Goal Zero to process safety.

Goal Zero also extends to the environment
with our goal of no operational spills.

2015 goal: reduce flaring in our upstream
business (million tonnes CO2 equivalent).
Our policy is to reduce any continuous flaring or
venting to as low a level as reasonably practical.
In 2015, we signed the World Bank
Zero Routine Flaring 2030 initiative.

2015 goal: achieve a refineries energy
intensity below 96.3 (based on the Refineries
Energy Index).

Progress in 2015

Priorities in 2016

We continue to make progress towards
Goal Zero. For more information see
page 33.

■■

■■

2005

2014

2015

2.5

0.99

0.94

The number of process safety events has
decreased. For more information see
page 33.
2012

2014

2015

91

57

51

The volume of operational spills slightly
increased but we continued to reduce
the number of operational spills. For more
information see page 36.
2005

2014

2015

3.4

0.7

0.8

We continued to implement measures to
reduce our operational flaring. Overall,
reductions in some locations were partly
offset by higher production. For more
information see page 28.
2005

2014

2015

20.8

13.0

11.8

Our refinery energy intensity level
increased slightly. For more information
see page 36.

■■
■■

■■

■■

■■

■■

■■
■■
■■

We aim to achieve top level energy-efficiency
performance in our refineries.
Improve energy efficiency to reduce our
greenhouse gas emissions.
2015 goal: improve effectiveness of
community feedback.
Since 2012, our community feedback
mechanisms (CFM) have been used to address
community concerns. We track the effectiveness
of CFMs to improve the quality of our reporting.

2012

2014

2015

98.4

94.9

95.4

We strengthened the quality of our data,
and as a result we:
■■

■■

included noise as a category in relevant
monitoring programmes;
used the data to inform our social
investment in Nigeria, to increase the
participation of local community groups.

For more information see page 38.

■■

Work with contractors in our safety
improvement programmes and
simplify contracts.
Support the development and application
of common industry safety standards.

Strengthen our process safety risk awareness.
Keep a strong focus on asset integrity and
operational discipline.

Continue to invest in improving the reliability
of our facilities to reduce operational spills.
Ensure we are effective in learning from
spill incidents.

Implement the flaring reduction projects
currently underway.
Work with the World Bank to find solutions
to host-government funding for flaring
reduction projects.

Monitor existing energy efficiency projects.
Share best practice within Shell.
Continue to focus on reliable and
efficient operations.

Introduce an online community feedback
tool to improve the quality of reporting and
tracking of community feedback.

07

08

INTRODUCTION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

SUSTAINABILITY GOVERNANCE
We have put clear and effective governance structures in place throughout Shell, supported
by standards, policies and controls. These are the foundation of the decisions we make and
actions we take at every level of the company.
Our governance procedures are applied to all
areas of decision-making across Shell. This involves
the Board of Royal Dutch Shell plc, four Board
committees, the Executive Committee (EC), and the
teams and people who work across our operations.
We make sure that decisions are communicated
and implemented within the business.
The Corporate and Social Responsibility Committee
(CSRC) is one of the Board committees. Its views
and findings about our sustainability practices are
integrated into Shell’s business to strengthen our
procedures and operations within countries.

The Committee’s members bring a variety of
experience from industry and national government.
In the first five months of 2015, the Chairman of the
CSRC was Charles O. Holliday, former CEO and
Chairman of DuPont. He was succeeded in May
2015 by Hans Wijers, former CEO and Chairman
of Akzo Nobel. Other members of the Committee
in 2015 were Sir Nigel Sheinwald, a former British
diplomat; Patricia A. Woertz, a business leader
with extensive experience in the oil sector; and
Gerrit Zalm, a former Minister of Finance of the
Netherlands, who stood down from the CSRC
at the end of 2015.

The overall accountability for sustainability within
Shell lies with the Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
and the EC. They are assisted by the health, safety,
security, environment and social performance
(HSSE & SP) executive team. Our standards are set
out in our HSSE & SP Control Framework and apply
to every Shell company. The process safety and
HSSE & SP assurance team, with a mandate from
the CSRC, provides independent assurance on
compliance with the Control Framework.

“The CSRC has a responsibility to review and
assist Shell to continuously improve its business
practices,” says Hans Wijers. “As a Committee,
we apply our own individual experience and
combined knowledge to review Shell’s standards
and the sites we visit. It is a critical role that can
lead to improvements in implementing safety
and environmental standards and in Shell’s
work with communities.”

CORPORATE AND SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY COMMITTEE

The Committee met five times in 2015. During
these formal meetings, the CSRC undertakes
in-depth reviews of key exposure areas of our
business, monitors any major issues of public
concern and Shell’s strategy to address them,
especially with respect to environmental and social
issues. Some topics are reviewed on an annual
basis, such as sustainability performance,
process safety, and management and
audit results.

The CSRC was established in 2005. The
Committee’s role is to review and advise on
policies and performance against the Shell
General Business Principles, the Shell Code of
Conduct and mandatory HSSE & SP standards.
In 2015, the CSRC visited an LNG-powered
supply vessel at our deep-water operations
in the Gulf of Mexico.

External opinion
“The International Audit Protocol
Consortium (IAPC) was founded by
the global infrastructure firm, AECOM,
to focus on promoting excellence
in global environmental, health, and
safety auditing. Shell has demonstrated
outstanding leadership in the IAPC by
participating across all consortium
activities. This participation has
included benchmarking key elements
of its world-class HSSE & SP audit
programme and sharing best practices
and continuous improvement concepts.

ACTIVITIES IN 2015

The consortium’s 57 multinational
member companies collaborate to
advance audit practices. Much of
the consortium’s success is based on
open forums that enable the sharing
of experiences. The future challenge
for Shell – as a leading company
within the IAPC – will be to promote
critical insight and knowledge to even
greater levels of assurance among
internal and external stakeholders.”

Other topics are reviewed on a rotational basis –
for example, maritime risks were reviewed in 2015.
There are also subjects that are discussed because
they are current. The Committee continued to
spend time on topics related to climate change
and the energy transition and also discussed
developments in Alaska, Nigeria and seismic
activity in Groningen, the Netherlands.

John Nagy, CPEA

The Committee visits locations to meet Shell
employees, contractors and suppliers and to
help review whether we are adequately putting
our standards into practice. During these visits,
the Committee meets members of the local
community and other interested parties, such
as non-governmental organisations, to hear their
views. After each visit, the Committee shares
its observations with the Board of Directors.

“

Vice President, IAPC
AECOM Global EHS Management
Consulting Practice
Chicago, Illinois USA

In 2015, the CSRC visited Shell deep-water
operations in the Gulf of Mexico and the Raízen
biofuels business in Brazil. During each visit, the
Committee met employees and representatives
from government and non-governmental
organisations. In 2015, individual CSRC members
also visited the Peterhead carbon capture and
storage project in the UK, the Moerdijk chemical
plant and the Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij
joint venture (NAM, Shell interest 50%) sites in
the Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION

09

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

EMBEDDING SUSTAINABILITY INTO PROJECTS
ASSESSING OUR PROJECTS

When we plan or develop new activities, or make
changes to existing ones, we apply a staged
project development process (see diagram) and
seek to be consistent around the world. We embed
sustainability across our projects by:
■■

■■

conducting integrated assessments on
the potential environmental, social and
health impacts. These may include specialist
studies on topics such as water, cultural
heritage or security; and
engaging with communities to understand
concerns they may have and discuss
possible ways to address these concerns.

These assessments help us to manage and
reduce potential impacts at all stages of
the project. We also draw on international
standards, such as those of the World Bank
and the International Finance Corporation,
to guide our engagement with communities.

OUR PEOPLE

We train our teams to understand how to embed
sustainability into our projects. They are supported
by specialists in the areas of, for example,
environmental management, health and social
performance including, but not limited to:
■■

■■

biodiversity, waste, energy and water
management; and
indigenous peoples’ rights, cultural heritage
and resettlement.

The specialists work with the project team to
help manage potential impacts on communities
or the environment during project design,
construction and operation.

OUR PROCESS

At each review stage in the project development
process, we decide if and how we are going
to move forward with the project. This includes
balancing short- and long-term interests, and
integrating economic, environmental and social
considerations into our decision-making.
The results of all assessments are documented
in a project-management plan which is approved
by the manager accountable for the project.
The plan is updated and its implementation is
monitored and reviewed throughout the lifespan
of the project.

PROJECT PROCESSES IN PRACTICE

ACTION

PROJECT DEVELOPMENT STAGE

IDENTIFY
AND ASSESS

Identify people who may be
interested in or affected by
the project.

Engage with stakeholders
(e.g. communities, host governments
and NGOs) and feed responses
into our risk analyses and decision
making process.
Conduct baseline studies of the local
environment (e.g. water, biodiversity,
social livelihoods) and consider how
the project may affect it.

Based on assessment of potential
impacts and stakeholder engagement,
identify mitigation and enhancement
measures, e.g. change a pipeline
route or reduce water used.
Implement mitigation plan through
project development and construction
and then in ongoing operations.

SELECT

DEFINE

EXECUTE

OPERATE

DECOMMISSION
AND RESTORE

THE ENERGY
TRANSITION

An energy transition is under way
to a global low-carbon energy
system. Managing this transition
is complex: energy is needed
to meet the needs of a growing
global population, yet the energy
produced needs to be less
carbon-intensive.
There are things societies can
do to speed up their own energy
transitions. For example, expand
the use of renewable energy,
use cleaner-burning natural gas
to replace coal, and increase
the uptake of carbon capture
and storage.
This section outlines Shell’s
approach to the energy transition.

49%
Share of our production that was
natural gas

72

MILLION TONNES

Direct greenhouse gas emissions
from facilities we operate

315

KILOTONNES

Reduction of CO2 at Quest CCS facility in 2015

Quest carbon capture and storage started up
at our oil sands operations in 2015. It can
capture more than one million tonnes of
CO2 emissions each year from the Scotford
Upgrader and store it safely underground.
Alberta, Canada.

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

11

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

THE ENERGY FUTURE
Energy is essential to our daily lives. But the way the world produces and consumes energy
continues to change.
For many, energy is a defining feature of modern life.
Lives and livelihoods, economies and communities
depend on convenient, reliable and affordable
energy – for power, heating, industry and transport
– to prosper and grow. As more people strive to
attain energy-dependent products and services,
more energy will be needed.
Energy has enhanced our lives: we have never
been more connected and, today, more people
have better opportunities, better health and better
living conditions. This progress has been dependent
on reliable, accessible energy. As the global
population increases and incomes rise, demand for
energy will grow: by 2050, the world’s population
will be approaching 10 billion, up from 7 billion
today, while more than two in three people could
be living in cities. Shell’s New Lens Scenarios
show that, within 50 years, global energy
demand could be 60% higher than in 2015.

MORE ENERGY, LESS CO2

The world must find ways to meet this rising energy
demand while reducing global greenhouse gas

net-zero emissions by the end of this century.
However, these scenarios assume an average
global temperature increase of 2–3 °C by 2100.

emissions to limit the effects of climate change. The
historic Paris Agreement adopted by 195 countries
in late 2015, and expected to be ratified over the
coming year, established a goal to limit the global
temperature rise this century to well below 2 °C.

A huge part of the challenge is to cut the carbon
from the existing fossil fuels that currently make
up around 80% of the energy mix. Our New Lens
Scenarios show that energy needs towards the
end of this century will be predominantly met
by renewable energy sources such as solar,
wind and biomass, with fossil fuels around
25% of the energy mix.

This reinforces the need to shift our existing energy
system to one based on energy sources that are
lower-carbon. It requires a huge undertaking –
a global energy transition involves producing and
consuming energy in a different way. We need
to design our economies, communities and lives
to thrive on these energy systems.

GLOBAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION

While renewable energy sources are growing fast,
there are technological challenges to achieving
a completely renewable energy system. The world
needs to shift four main areas of global energy
consumption to low-carbon alternatives: electricity,
transport, industry and domestic use (see diagram).
Each of these sectors will transition at a different pace.

It will be necessary to achieve close to net-zero
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions as early as
possible this century if we are to maintain a
world below 2 °C. In a net-zero emissions world,
CO2 emissions would be safely absorbed by the
earth’s natural infrastructure – such as forests and
oceans – with any remaining emissions safely
stored underground by carbon capture and storage
(CCS). Shell’s New Lens Scenarios show that, while
difficult, it could be possible for society to approach

Today, 18% of total global energy use is provided
by electricity. Around 40% of this electricity is still
generated by coal, while just over 20% comes from
renewable energy sources. By 2050, more than
40% of the world’s electricity could be powered

TODAY’S ENERGY NEEDS
The world today currently consumes most of its energy from coal, oil and gas sources, with around a fifth of total energy supply used to generate electricity.
Energy sources differ across the sectors of industry, transport and domestic use which all need to transition to low-carbon energy options.

CURRENT GLOBAL ENERGY DEMAND

Oil
31%

Gas
21%

Coal
29%

Biomass
10%

ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY SECTOR AND CONSUMER TRENDS

Nuclear 5%

30%

96%

27%

of domestic and
commercial demand is
still met by traditional
biomass energy

of transport
is fuelled by
liquid fuels

of industry
runs on gas

DOMESTIC & COMMERCIAL

TRANSPORT

Renewables 4%
ELECTRICITY GENERATION

11%

5% 2%

18%
41%

20%

6%

of total final
energy consumption
is electricity

22%
Oil

Coal

Gas

Biomass

Nuclear

INDUSTRY

3% 1%

5% 4%

5% 4%

30%

20%

27%

27%
96%

29%

Renewables (including hydro)

Source: International Energy Agency, Key world energy statistics 2015 and World energy outlook 2015.

Electricity

Heat

22%

Liquid fuels (including biofuels)

22%

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

12

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

THE ENERGY FUTURE CONTINUED
by renewable energy sources, according to the
International Energy Agency. At the same time, only
around 3% of transport is powered by renewable
energy sources. In 2040, this could reach 8%.
Many forms of transport will, likely, still rely on
oil-based products (blended with biofuels).
There are some industrial users, such as steel and
aluminium producers, whose processes require
temperatures that are currently difficult to achieve
without hydrocarbons. Across other industries and
in our homes, the existing infrastructure needs to
change to shift from fossil fuels to electricity.
The scale of the required investment is another
reason why the energy transition will take time.
One possible solution to meet energy demand
is to have a hybrid system of both renewable
energy sources and lower-carbon oil and gas. This
combination would give people access to a full suite
of energy products until the technological challenges
to achieving a lower-carbon energy system are solved.

MEETING THE ENERGY CHALLENGE

A successful energy transition requires sustained
and substantial investment in all energy sources,
including oil and gas production, to meet the global
demand needed to fuel economic development.
If the world is to achieve an energy transition

and approach net-zero emissions, our New Lens
Scenarios suggest that society should grow its
share of renewable energy to up to 70% by 2100.
Even if global demand for hydrocarbons is flat, there
still needs to be investment in oil and gas supply
simply to meet this demand. Without this ongoing
investment, the production from existing fields
drops an average 4–6% each year.

MANAGING THE TRANSITION

The Paris Agreement has set the global direction
for the energy transition. Government and business
need to deliver policies and products in support
of this. The energy transition will require a mixture of
vision and realism, urgency and long-term planning.
There are many things that can be done now to
reduce global emissions. Some will have a more
immediate impact – such as substituting coal
for natural gas or advancing renewable energy;
while other solutions and technologies could
play a larger role later in the transition – such as
introducing new forms of transport fuels or carbon
capture and storage (CCS). In a similar vein, it
will be easier for some sectors of the economy or
particular countries to reduce their carbon emissions
faster than others in the coming decades.

Within Shell, we can best help to decarbonise the
existing hydrocarbon energy system by promoting the
use of cleaner-burning natural gas and by advancing
CCS technology. We also support the implementation
of widespread government-led carbon-pricing
mechanisms (see page 13) and are investing in
efficient fuels and lubricants, and transport alternatives
that include biofuels and hydrogen fuel. (See page
20 and 21).
Yet, there needs to be a broader response with
cross-sector collaboration on an unprecedented
scale. Government, business and civil society need
to work together, particularly in the design and
implementation of local energy policies, city planning
and infrastructure. For example, the transport and
mobility sector needs greater collaboration among
manufacturers, energy companies and governments
if innovation is to reach the scale required. In 2015,
Shell was a founding member of the Energy Transitions
Commission. This is a cross-sector collaboration
of leading individuals from the public, private and
social sectors to make recommendations that will
contribute to the energy transition.
We believe that our capacity to innovate and to
take a long-term view on investment, along with
our experience, can help us to make an important
contribution to the energy transition.

FUTURE ENERGY NEEDS
A successful energy transition requires substantial investment across all energy sources, including oil and gas production, to meet a growing demand for energy.

THE ENERGY CHALLENGE
There is more demand for energy globally as the world’s population and living standards increase.

GROWING POPULATION

RISING DEMAND

ONGOING SUPPLY

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE

Global population will increase
from around 7 billion today
to nearly 10 billion by 2050,
with 67% living in cities.

Global energy demand will likely be
almost 60% higher in 2060 than today,
with 2 billion vehicles on the road
(800 million today).

Renewable energy could triple by 2050,
but we will still need large amounts of
oil and gas to provide the full range
of energy products we need.

Net-zero emissions is a potentially
achievable societal ambition.

Source: UN World Population Prospects (2015 revision); World Urbanization Prospects (2014 revision); International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 2015; Shell New Lens Scenarios.

TOWARDS A LOWER-CARBON FUTURE
Shell is working to meet the energy challenge in many different ways:

H

Bringing lower-carbon
natural gas to a
wider market

Industry leader
in carbon capture
and storage

A biofuels business

Investment in lowercarbon technologies such
as hydrogen and wind

Continued investment
in oil and gas to meet
growing demand

Advocating
government-led
carbon-pricing
mechanisms

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE
At Shell, we believe there are clear, practical steps the world can take to tackle climate change
while continuing to provide energy to meet present and future needs.
The Paris Agreement provides a way forward for
governments and society to find effective policy
and cultural changes that can drive low-carbon
business and consumer choices. Shell supports
long-term climate goals that address environmental
pressures and provide development opportunities
for communities. We all need to work together to
achieve the ambitions set in the Paris Agreement.
Targets for countries are a good place to start
and set the direction for the significant global
undertaking ahead.

REDUCING EMISSIONS

It will be necessary for the world to reach net-zero
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions if there is to be
a successful shift to a low-carbon energy system
and to keep global temperatures well below
2 °C. This will require a combination of the best
of renewables, gas and oil to meet all types of
energy needs and create low-carbon economies
and communities. It also requires the large-scale
implementation of technologies, such as carbon
capture and storage. A number of measures can
be applied to reach net-zero emissions, including:

■■

■■

■■

■■

■■

regulatory measures such as government
implemented carbon-pricing mechanisms
to motivate investment in emissions reduction
and energy efficiency;
energy efficiency to encourage smarter
practices and stricter regulations for
compact urban development, infrastructure
and energy-efficient buildings, as well as
investment in low-emission transport;
ways to reduce or offset CO2 emissions,
such as reforestation and carbon capture
and storage (CCS);
removal of consumption subsidies for fossil
fuels to create a level playing field for all
energy providers, and
financial incentives that encourage the
development, demonstration and deployment
of new low-carbon technologies.

We are currently working with a number of
governments around the world to develop an
appropriate energy mix that can help these
countries to move towards a low-carbon
energy system. (See box).

Natural gas can play a role in helping countries diversify their energy mix. Shell has
been working with China’s Development Research Centre on China’s long-term energy
development strategy. Guangzhou Zhujiang, China.

CHINA’S FUTURE
ENERGY MIX

Since 2011, Shell has worked closely with
the Chinese government’s Development
Research Centre (DRC) of the State Council
on China’s medium- to long-term energy
development strategy. The ongoing
collaboration has identified the key energy
challenges facing the country and suggested
detailed, practical solutions.
The recently concluded second phase of the
collaboration examined the important role
natural gas can play in helping China diversify
its energy mix, boost economic development,
improve air quality, and help meet China’s
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
for reducing carbon emissions. Displacement
of coal use was specifically identified as one
of the key areas for natural gas development.
The research draws on international
experience from other countries and regions
that have increased the share of gas in their
energy mix and offers insights into how China
could replicate this. The Shell-DRC joint report
“Research on China’s Gas Development
Strategy” recommended the liberalisation
of China’s natural gas value chain as a
way to support and enable greater natural
gas consumption.
This would require opening up China’s
gas market to new entrants and increasing
domestic natural gas supplies; enhancing
the construction of pipeline networks and
gas storage facilities, accelerating the reform
of regulatory systems and institutions, and
the development of market-based pricing
mechanisms. The report recommendations
have informed the development of China’s
13th Five Year Plan for 2016–2020.

13

14

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE CONTINUED
MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE

Shell is meeting the energy challenge in many
different ways. Over the past decade we have
invested in cleaner-burning natural gas and
sugar-cane ethanol, a low-carbon biofuel.
We are also working on new fuels for transport.
Our approach to mitigating climate change is
to take action in the following ways:

Natural gas as an alternative to coal

Natural gas produces half the amount of CO2
as coal when burnt to generate electric power.
Greater use of natural gas as a fuel for power
plants, instead of coal, could significantly reduce
emissions from the power sector. This can also
be the most affordable route for countries that
are seeking to reduce their CO2 emissions
while maintaining reliable power generation.

Government carbon-pricing mechanisms

Shell has long called for governments to
create carbon-pricing mechanisms that deliver
a meaningful cost on CO2 emissions. These
mechanisms offer an effective way to stimulate
the development of low-carbon technologies,
generate revenue for governments and, ultimately,
give consumers new energy choices. It could
encourage the deployment of renewable energy,
carbon capture and storage (CCS) and nuclear
power plants.

Carbon capture and storage

The International Energy Agency estimates that
without CCS the cost of achieving a 2 °C scenario
could be around 138% higher. Over time, CCS
could capture enough CO2 to deliver a 13%
reduction in overall emissions needed by 2050
to limit the rise in global temperature to 2 °C.
CCS is currently the only technology that can
capture industrial CO2 emissions.
If CCS is to have an impact on global CO2
emissions it needs to be both supported by
governments and taken up widely by industry,
including power generation companies. In 2015,
Shell started operating Quest, our CCS project
in Canada. (See page 19).

Low-carbon energy: renewable energy
and biofuels

Shell’s New Lens Scenarios show how renewable
energy could eventually become the largest
component of the global energy system.
We currently produce biofuels in Brazil through
our Raízen joint venture. We have longer-term
investments with partners in developing alternative
transport fuels, such as hydrogen, and advanced
biofuels. (See page 20).

Combining renewable energy
with hydrocarbons

Reliable energy solutions can be designed by
combining fast-growing renewable energy with
hydrocarbons. In practice, some countries may
choose to develop smaller scale power grids
that use a mix of energy sources. For example,
Shell is working on the design of a combined
natural gas and solar power project with Marikina
City, Metropolitan Manila, the Philippines.

COLLABORATION AND
PUBLIC POLICY

Governments play a key role in their energy
transitions: their policy choices can drive innovation
in low-carbon technologies, and encourage
investment in low-carbon energy and infrastructure.
Policies and frameworks need to be developed to
support businesses and consumers to make choices
that reduce emissions. This could bring about
fundamental change. Innovation can be driven by
a global carbon emissions market – an approach
that is suggested in the Paris Agreement.
Shell has a long history of collaborating to build
international policy and market frameworks.
For example, we were a founding member of the
International Emissions Trading Association (IETA),
which today is a leading business association
focused on carbon pricing and the development
of emissions markets. We continue to work with
IETA and a number of other organisations on
climate change issues. (See page 45).

SHAREHOLDER RESOLUTION
IN 2015
In 2015, a shareholder resolution was filed
for Shell´s Annual General Meeting (AGM)
requesting additional information from Shell
regarding business risks associated with
climate change. We have been asked to
disclose this information from 2016 onwards.

The resolution was prepared by a coalition
of UK asset owners and mutual fund managers.
It was intended to emphasise the need to
balance the short- and long-term interests
of Shell’s shareholders in relation to Shell’s
actions to mitigate climate change.
We supported the resolution at the 2015
AGM. We provided additional reporting
in 2015 and we maintain our commitment
to engage with our shareholders. In 2016,
we continue to report on the five areas
specified in the resolution. These five areas
are Shell’s ongoing operational emissions
management, asset portfolio resilience to
post-2035 scenarios, low-carbon research
and development and investment strategies,
as well as Shell’s public policy interventions.
Information that addresses the resolution
can be found on the following pages of
this report:
■■

reducing emissions, page 13;

■■

portfolio resilience, page 15;

■■

low-carbon energy investment, page 18;

■■

Shell’s scorecard structure, page 48; and

■■

collaboration and public policy, page 14.

The full resolution can be viewed at
www.shell.com/ghg. We will continue
to publish additional information on this
website as it becomes available. This will
include, for example, our greenhouse gas
emissions, additional information on our
resilience to post-2035 scenarios and our
submission to the Carbon Disclosure Project.

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

PORTFOLIO RESILIENCE

Shell has long taken into account the potential risks
and threats to the viability and profitability of major
projects to ensure the robustness of our portfolio.
Our investment horizons can be decades ahead.
At Shell, we assess the greenhouse gas (GHG)
risks on all our planned ventures. We generally
apply a GHG project screening value (PSV) for
all new projects, and have done so since 2000.
Since 2008, our GHG PSV has been $40 per
tonne. This means that new projects are assessed
for the financial impact if a government imposed
price or levy of $40 per tonne for GHG emissions
is implemented. For projects with a high exposure to
government imposed carbon pricing or legislation,
we consider the impact of higher GHG prices.
The screening value can affect our project design
in a number of ways. Some projects may be
stopped at an early stage if the GHG footprint
is too high or a design may be altered to reduce
GHG emissions at start-up. For example, we have
stopped some projects at an early stage, due to
high levels of CO2 in the hydrocarbon reservoir.
Alternatively, a project may be designed to
enable CO2 reduction at a later date if there
is an increase in the local government imposed
carbon price – for example, by adding CCS.

We strengthen the resilience of our portfolio with
internal targets on energy efficiency and emission
reductions at our assets. We use targets that are
based on the local context and which cannot
meaningfully be converted into company-wide
goals. Our Carbon Disclosure Project submission
provides more information about how we apply
our targets.

ADAPTATION

The effects of climate change will require
governments, businesses and local communities
to adapt their infrastructure to the changing
environment. Across Shell, we take steps at our
facilities around the world to ensure that they
are resilient to climate change. This reduces
the vulnerability of our assets and infrastructure
to potential extreme variability in weather
conditions linked to climate change.
We take different approaches to adaptation
for existing operating assets and new projects.
We progressively adjust our design standards
for new projects while, for existing assets,
we identify those that are most vulnerable to
climate change and take appropriately timed
action – for example, by upgrading refinery
drainage systems.

Special equipment enables us to measure changes in environmental conditions, which are
factored into our project design criteria and support safe and more efficient operations.
Gulf of Mexico, USA.

ENERGY EFFICIENCY

Across all our Upstream and Downstream
operations, we strive for improved energy
efficiency to help reduce Shell’s overall GHG
emissions. Better energy efficiency can be
achieved by improving the reliability of our
equipment, by smart scheduling of maintenance
activities or by installing more energy-efficient
equipment. The main metric that we use to
measure our energy efficiency is energy
intensity – that is, the amount or energy
consumed for every unit of output.
Each of our 13 Shell-operated refineries has to
identify measures to improve energy efficiency
every year. For example, in 2015 we installed
a cogeneration unit at our Bukom refinery
in Singapore. This unit improves energy
efficiency by recovering waste heat from
the gas turbine’s exhaust to generate steam.
Between 2009 and 2015, the energy intensity
of our refineries decreased by about 6%,
due to a combination of improved equipment
reliability and better operating processes and
energy-efficiency projects. Energy savings in
downstream, combined with changes in the
refining energy mix to lower-carbon alternatives,
reduced the refining CO2 emission footprint
by about 1.5 million tonnes each year. These
energy savings helped us to reduce costs: the
total annual energy cost of our 13 refineries is
around $2.5 billion. We were able to reduce
costs between 2009 and 2015 by about
$100 million each year.
We also continue to improve the scheduling
of our shipping operations which helps to
reduce fuel consumption, loading and
discharging times.
For information on our energy-efficiency
performance, see page 36.

15

16

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

NATURAL GAS
The world needs to find lower-carbon ways to produce and consume energy. At Shell,
we believe natural gas has an important role to play in meeting that challenge.
Natural gas is abundant, versatile
and cleaner-burning than coal.
It makes up about half of Shell’s
total production and is one of the
few energy sources that can meet
many energy needs: to generate
electricity, heat homes, power
industry, and fuel ships and trucks.
According to the International
Energy Agency, there are enough
recoverable natural gas resources to last more
than 200 years at current levels of consumption.
Natural gas can make an important contribution
to the energy transition. It produces around half
the CO2 emissions of coal when burnt to generate
electricity. The production and use of both coal and
natural gas for power generation emits methane,
which contributes to global warming. The use
of gas for power will have less global warming
impact than coal over a 100-year time frame as
long as the total methane emissions of the gas
supply chain do not exceed 3%. Most independent
studies demonstrate that the emissions from the
gas value chain are well below this level.
(See page 27).

to switch coal-fired power plants to natural gas.
Modern natural gas plants emit less than one-tenth
of sulphur oxides, nitrogen oxides, particulates,
and heavy metals compared with coal. We work
with a number of governments to support the
creation of infrastructure needed to use gas as
an energy source – such as liquefied natural
gas import terminals.
Renewable energy will play a key role in the
transition to a lower-carbon future. Yet, some
renewable energy sources, such as solar and
wind power, are intermittent due to the current
absence of large-scale energy storage. They
need a partner, such as natural gas, to maintain
a reliable flow of electricity. A natural gas-fired
power plant takes much less time to start and
stop than a coal-fired plant.
Natural gas can also be used in combination
with carbon capture and storage (CCS) to reduce
CO2 emissions. CCS could remove up to 90% of
CO2 emissions from power generation and play
a key role in supporting the shift to a lower-carbon
future. (See page 19).

There is also potential to significantly reduce local
air pollution by replacing coal with natural gas
in power generation. This is already happening
in Beijing, for example, where steps are being taken
Phase 3 of the Malampaya deep-water gas-to-power project was completed in 2015,
providing up to 30% of the country’s energy requirements. The Philippines.

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS
Liquefied natural gas (LNG) is helping to bring the benefits of cleaner-burning natural gas to
markets all over the world. Shell is one of the world’s leading suppliers of LNG.
The LNG process enables natural
gas to be easily transported
from areas where it is abundant
to places where it is needed. To
create LNG, natural gas is cooled
to -162 ºC, turning it into liquid
form and shrinking its volume
by 600 times. At its destination,
the LNG is converted back into
gas for conventional use.
Shell was a pioneer of the LNG industry more
than 50 years ago and is one of the world’s largest
LNG suppliers. Today, new global LNG supply is
mainly coming from Australia, North America and
East Africa. At the same time, we expect LNG
demand to rise by 5% each year over the next
two decades. Shell is currently involved in several
LNG projects around the world.

FLOATING LNG

Floating liquefied natural gas (FLNG) facilities
enable LNG to be produced, liquefied, stored
and offloaded at sea. This makes it possible to
reach offshore gas fields previously considered
too expensive or too difficult to develop. FLNG
is designed to reduce the local environmental
footprint of LNG infrastructure and decrease
the disturbance to land and marine life.
We are constructing our first FLNG facility, Prelude
FLNG (Shell interest 67.5%), which will be located
475 km off the coast of Western Australia. It is
under construction in various locations around the
world – the main construction site is the Samsung
Heavy Industries Yard in Geoje, South Korea.
Once completed, Prelude FLNG will be the
largest floating offshore facility in the world.

For example, the LNG plant at Sakhalin-2 (Shell
interest 27.5%), located off the east coast of
Russia, provides around 9% of Japan’s and 8%
of South Korea’s LNG supplies. LNG Canada
(Shell interest 50%), is a proposed joint venture to
develop an LNG export project in British Columbia,
connecting the gas supply from north-west
Canada to markets in Asia.

A module is lifted on to Prelude Floating LNG which is being assembled in Geoje,
South Korea. Prelude will be located off the coast of Western Australia.

LNG FOR TRANSPORT

Cleaner vehicles and fuels are needed to
meet increasing demand for transport with less
greenhouse gas emissions. Cleaner-burning
LNG is a fuel for heavy-duty road transport,
shipping and industry that is virtually free
of sulphur emissions and has lower levels
of nitrogen dioxide and particulates. It can
be used as an alternative transport fuel to
diesel and heavy fuel oil.
In shipping, LNG is already used as a fuel
for vessels on inland and coastal waterways.
In Norway, Gasnor, a Shell company, is
a leading supplier of LNG to industrial and
marine operators. Since 2015, Shell is able
to import and use storage capacity at the
Gas Access to Europe (Gate) LNG terminal in
the Netherlands, which enables us to supply
LNG to marine and road transport customers
in north-west Europe. Shell is also using the
terminal to supply LNG fuel to its growing
truck-refuelling network in the Netherlands.
In the same year, Shell also signed an
agreement with Plouvier Transport NV and
Intertrans Tankschiffahrt in Europe to charter
15 new inland dual-fuel barges. They will run
predominantly on LNG and are expected
to use the new Gate terminal.
Since 2015, Shell has been operating two
offshore supply vessels for our deep-water
activities in the Gulf of Mexico. The vessels
run mainly on LNG, with one more LNGfuelled vessel on order. We have also started
construction of an LNG refuelling vessel
to supply LNG-powered vessels and ships
across north-west Europe.
In the USA, Shell continues to work with the
truck-stop chain, Travel Centers of America,
to develop a network of LNG refuelling
stations for trucks. The first station was opened
in California in 2014 and five more LNG
stations are now operational in California,
Texas and Louisiana. Shell also has two
LNG refuelling stations in Canada.

17

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

18

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Innovation and advanced technologies play a crucial role in the energy transition.
Our research and development (R&D) activities aim to address the need for more energy
while reducing the environmental impact.
We have programmes, partners and funding
methods to help us develop new technologies. Shell
has research partnerships with leading universities
and research institutes including Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in the USA, Imperial College
in the UK and Tsinghua University in China.
Our three main programmes that support future
energy technology development are Shell
GameChanger, Shell Technology Ventures (STV)
and Shell TechWorks. Shell GameChanger nurtures
radical, unproven ideas that have the potential
to influence the energy future. STV, our corporate
ventures arm, invests in companies and technologies
that are likely to accelerate the development and
deployment of innovations in the energy sector.
Shell TechWorks is an open innovation programme
that connects entrepreneurs and technology start-ups
from other sectors to apply different technologies
to the energy sector.

LOW-CARBON ENERGY INVESTMENT
Over the past six years, we have invested about
$1.1 billion in low-carbon R&D. We support
the development and implementation of new
energy technologies by investing in companies
and technologies that are complementary to
Shell’s existing business.

Through STV, we invest across the full scope
of alternative energy: in production, we invested
in GlassPoint solar technology (see page 21);
in energy distribution, we invested in Next Step
Living, a company that helps homeowners improve
energy efficiency and use more renewable energy;
in energy storage, we invested in Aquion Energy,
a company that produces saltwater ion batteries
that can store solar power for use at night for
industrial purposes.
Other areas of low-carbon investment include
supporting the global Carbon XPRIZE in the area
of carbon capture and use. In Canada, Shell and

nine members of Canada’s Oil Sands Innovation
Alliance are funding an XPRIZE to foster ideas to
find alternative uses for captured carbon dioxide.
As part of our low-carbon investment portfolio,
we are also researching new transport solutions
including hydrogen technologies, energy storage
for electric vehicles (see page 21) and advanced
biofuels (see page 20).

Stages of low-carbon investment

Our investment in low-carbon R&D can be
categorised into six areas. (See diagram).
We try and test many new technologies, often
working in partnership with others. If the technology
development shows commercial viability at the
R&D stage, we will continue to invest in it.
For example, over a number of years, we have
conducted seven advanced biofuel trials to test
new biofuels made from plant and crop waste.
Today, we have three demonstration plants where
we evaluate cellulosic ethanol and manufacturing
processes in which advanced biofuels are
added to existing fuels.

LOW
CARBON R+D
AND INVESTMENT
STRATEGIES
LOW-CARBON
RESEARCH
& DEVELOPMENT
INVESTMENT

Commercial operation (volumes in Shell share)
Technology demonstration/research
GAS

Used in Shell operations

EXPLORATION
LNG
LNG (6.5 MTPA)*

CCS

QATAR CARBONATES
AND CARBON
STORAGE CENTRE

BANGALORE R&D
ADVANCED BIOFUELS
BIOFUELS

ADSORPTION
TECHNOLOGY
CCS ALTERNATIVE

GORGON (3–4 MTPA)

WESTHOLLOW
RESEARCH CENTRE
ADVANCED BIOFUELS

RAÍZEN
ADVANCED BIOFUELS

RAÍZEN
BIOFUELS

H2 NETWORK
(GERMANY)

H2 NETWORK
(6 SITES)

SOLAR
PHOTOVOLTAIC
(PV) CELLS
SOLAR
FUTURE ENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES

SHELL TECHNOLOGY
VENTURES
E-MOBILITY
BATTERY TECHNOLOGY

ENERGY
CARRIERS

WIND

H2 NETWORK
EUROPE, USA

OFFSHORE (50 MW net)
ONSHORE (450 MW net)

2-B ENERGY
TURBINE
TECHNOLOGY

RESEARCH &
DEVELOPMENT

TECHNOLOGY CENTRE MONGSTAD
CANSOLV TECHNOLOGY
QUEST (UP TO 1 MTPA)

GLASSPOINT
SOLAR TECHNOLOGY

ENGINEERING
& DESIGN

FINAL INVESTMENT
DECISION

INCREASING TECHNOLOGY MATURITY
* Million tonnes per annum.

LNG (24.2 MTPA)
GAS-TO-LIQUIDS

LNG (6.3 MTPA)

ON STREAM

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

CARBON CAPTURE AND STORAGE
Carbon capture and storage – or CCS – is the name given to a combination of technologies
that captures and stores carbon dioxide (CO2) deep underground, preventing its release into
the atmosphere.

consultation programme with nearby communities.
We share our baseline results from our monitoring
programme with the local community.

At Shell, we believe the world will need CCS
to achieve the ambition of net-zero emissions.
CCS is already being used around the world
to capture CO2 from power generation and
industrial processes with around 25 million tonnes
of CO2 captured and stored globally each year.
Many companies have further CCS projects in
development. There is considerable potential for the
future deployment of CCS in a variety of industrial
sectors including power, iron and steel.

Quest started operating in 2015. At full capacity
it can capture and store more than 1 million tonnes
of CO2 each year – equivalent to the emissions
from about 250,000 cars. Since its start-up, Quest
has reduced CO2 emissions by 315 kilotonnes.
The provincial government of Alberta and federal
government of Canada have provided C$865
million to support the development of Quest.

SHELL CANSOLV

Shell and our joint-venture partners are freely sharing
any data or intellectual property generated by the
Quest project to help others advance CCS projects
and demonstrate its value on an industrial scale.

At the Peterhead power station in Scotland, which
is operated by the British energy company SSE,
we were, until recently, designing a full-scale gas
CCS project for a natural gas-fired power plant.
The CCS technology was being designed to
capture and move CO2 from the power station
offshore through pipelines for storage deep under
the seabed of the North Sea. Unfortunately, the
UK government withdrew potential funding in
late 2015, and the project did not proceed. We
learnt much about how to reduce the costs of future
CCS projects. The technical data and reports
from our work is made publicly available.

QUEST, CANADA

In Alberta, Canada, Shell operates a joint venture
(Shell interest 60%) to develop the first commercialscale CCS for reserves extracted from our oil sands
operations. The facility is designed to capture up to
35% of the current CO2 emissions from the Scotford
Upgrader – the site where bitumen is processed
into synthetic crude oil. The captured CO2 is stored
in a porous rock layer about 60 km away and
more than 2 km below ground.

CCS technology developed by Shell Cansolv
is used at the Boundary Dam power station in
Saskatchewan, Canada. It is Saskpower’s largest
coal-fired power station and a significant source
of power for the region. Both sulphur dioxide
and CO2 are captured from the power station.

PETERHEAD, UK

Monitoring Quest

Quest is designed to meet all the requirements for
the safe and permanent storage of CO2. We have
developed a rigorous monitoring programme to
ensure that the CO2 remains safely and securely
underground. This includes continuous pipeline
monitoring and early-warning systems, groundwater
sampling and 3D seismic surveying. Throughout the
development of Quest, we conducted an extensive

CARBON CAPTURE AND STORAGE OVERVIEW

1

CAPTURE
CO2 capture separates CO2 from gas,
before it is emitted, using a chemical solvent.
The captured CO2 is separated from the
solvent and compressed into a liquid form
for transport.

2

TRANSPORT
CO2 is generally pumped along a pipeline,
taking the CO2 from the industrial site where
it has been produced, to its storage site which
may be onshore or offshore.

3

STORAGE
CO2 is injected deep underground into the
microscopic spaces in porous rocks. A layer
of impermeable rock, called a cap rock, lies
directly above the porous rocks ensuring that
the CO2 remains there permanently.

1

2

2000m

13%

CCS CONTRIBUTION
The IEA considers that CCS,
as part of a portfolio of
actions, can account for 13%
of total energy-related CO2
reductions needed by 2050.

3

19

20

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

LOWER-CARBON ALTERNATIVES
Shell invests in a range of lower-carbon technologies and fuels, sometimes working with partners.
Many of these technologies have the potential to bring about changes in the energy system.

BIOFUELS

In the coming decades, biofuels
produced from sugar cane and
other crops are expected to play
a valuable part in the changing
energy mix. They are a cost-effective way to reduce
CO2 emissions in the transport sector, as long as
their production is managed in a responsible way.
Our joint venture, Raízen (Shell interest 50%), in Brazil
is the world’s largest producer of sugar-cane ethanol.
We also buy and blend biofuels into conventional
fuels. We invest in advanced biofuels made from
plant and crop waste. These are expected to further
improve the sustainability of biofuels and increase
production from the same amount of land.

Producing biofuels with Raízen

The use of sugar-cane ethanol produces 70% less
CO2 emissions than conventional petrol. In 2015,
Raízen produced more than 2 billion litres of
low-carbon ethanol from Brazilian sugar cane.
The company’s production process is designed to
minimise its environmental footprint. By-products are
recycled as natural fertilisers. Waste sugar-cane fibres
are used as fuel to generate electricity for the mills or
exported to the grid. The sugar cane is grown using
only natural rainfall, water recycled from the production
process and irrigation on a small area. Raízen’s
harvesting process is already 98% mechanised which
improves worker conditions and operational efficiency.
Raízen was the first company to certify a sugar-cane
mill using the Bonsucro sustainability standard in
2011. Bonsucro’s robust social and environmental
standards are independently audited and certified.
At the end of 2015, 13 of Raízen’s 24 sugar-cane
mills were certified to the Bonsucro standard.
Raízen is also working in partnership with the
non-governmental organisations, Imaflora and
Solidaridad, to support its third-party sugarcane
suppliers to become more sustainable producers.

SUSTAINABILITY STANDARDS

Shell currently buys biofuels from more than
100 suppliers around the world for blending
with conventional fuels. In 2015, we used around
9.5 billion litres of biofuels in the petrol and diesel
we sold worldwide – making us one of the largest
blenders and distributors of biofuels globally.
Nearly all of the contracts with our suppliers of biofuels
that we purchase for blending contain environmental
and social clauses. These requirements aim to protect
human rights and the biodiversity of ecosystems. We
also continue to work on increasing the proportion
of independently certified volumes. In 2015, around
40% of these volumes were certified as sustainable by
an independent auditor, working to standards set out
in the European Union’s Renewable Energy Directive.

We support the adoption of international standards
including the Round Table on Responsible Soy,
the Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials, the
Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) and
Bonsucro for sugar cane. Every year, 100% of the
palm oil that Shell blends is either independently
certified by RSPO or the International Sustainability
and Carbon Certification, or covered by offsets
from GreenPalm.
In 2015, Shell completed a project with Patum
Vegetable Oil in Thailand that helped farmers
to meet RSPO standards. Around 800 farmers
were successfully audited and received RSPO
certification, which increased the availability
of certified material by around 15,000 tonnes.
We are also working to increase the purchase
of independently certified sustainable sugar-cane
ethanol and soy biodiesel.

DEVELOPING ADVANCED BIOFUELS
We continue to invest in new ways to produce
biofuels from sustainable feedstocks such as waste
and cellulosic biomass. Shell has three pilot plants
at different stages of construction in the USA
and India. The pilot plants will convert cellulosic
biomass, which is non-food plants and waste,
into a range of products, including petrol, diesel,
aviation fuel and ethanol.
In addition, in 2015 Raízen opened its cellulosic
ethanol plant at its Costa Pinto mill in Brazil. It is
expected to produce 40 million litres a year
of advanced biofuels from sugar-cane residues.

ENERGY-EFFICIENT TRANSPORT

Energy efficiency is an important consideration
in our development of fuels and lubricants that
keep people and goods on the move.

Efficient fuels

Shell supplies fuels to millions of drivers around
the world every day. For more than a century,
our scientists have worked to develop high-quality
products to improve the driving experience and
energy efficiency of our customers. For example,
Shell FuelSave Diesel contains ingredients designed
to improve the combustion process in vehicle
engines. This, in turn, can boost efficiency and help
drivers save fuel. Shell FuelSave Diesel has helped
reduce the carbon footprint of business customers in
the bus, coach, construction and trucking sectors.
Shell GTL Fuel uses a gas-to-liquids (GTL) process,
with natural gas as a feedstock, to produce a
cleaner-burning alternative fuel to conventional
diesel. It is virtually sulphur-free, odourless and
helps to improve local air quality. Shell GTL Fuel
can be used as a drop-in diesel fuel without
engine modification or new infrastructure or
vehicle investment.

HYDROGEN

Hydrogen has the potential to
be an important low-carbon
transport fuel. Hydrogen
electric vehicles are quick to
refuel and can drive a similar
range as conventional cars. Hydrogen electric
vehicles could also help improve local air
quality as they produce water rather than
emissions from the tailpipe. When electricity
from renewable sources is used to produce
the hydrogen, in future, they could generate
close to no carbon emissions.
Shell is taking part in several initiatives to
encourage the adoption of hydrogen electric
energy as a transport fuel. Hydrogen electric
transport can succeed if vehicle manufacturers
and fuel suppliers, with the support of
governments, work together to enable wide
uptake of the technology. There needs to be
a sufficient refuelling infrastructure to attract
customers, as well as incentives for businesses
to build this infrastructure.
In Germany, for example, the government
is supporting the deployment of a national
network of hydrogen electric fuelling stations
across the country by 2023. We are working
on this project with our joint-venture partners in
H2 Mobility Germany – Air Liquide, Daimler,
Linde, OMV and Total. We currently operate
three hydrogen filling stations in Germany
and have two hydrogen filling stations in
Los Angeles, California. We are assessing
the potential for similar projects in the USA,
UK, Switzerland, Austria, France, Belgium,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands.

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

Advanced lubricants

The lubricants we produce for motorists and
commercial vehicles are designed to increase
engine efficiency and reduce fuel consumption.
Shell is one of the largest investors in research and
development (R&D) among international oil and gas
companies and employs more than 200 scientists
and engineers in lubricants R&D. Our technology
centre in Shanghai, China, researches motor oils
for passenger cars, heavy-duty engine oils and
transmission fluids for the Asian markets, while
our marine power innovation centre in Hamburg,
Germany, develops lubricants for ships.
Our Shell Rimula range of heavy-duty engine
oils was developed with leading engine makers
including Mercedes Benz. The oils help heavy-duty
commercial vehicle operators improve the fuel
economy of their fleets, while providing extra
protection against wear in the vehicle engine.
We also produce high-quality engine lubricants
which can improve the fuel efficiency of passenger
cars and motorcycles. These include products
manufactured using Shell PurePlus Technology that
applies the GTL process to produce a clear base
oil. This has much lower levels of impurities than
other base oils and can help improve performance.

Fuel efficiency

Each year, Shell runs a series of competitions,
called Shell Eco-marathon, in which we challenge
student teams from around the world to design
and build ultra energy-efficient vehicles. The events
– which take place in the Americas, Africa, Asia
and Europe – inspire young engineers to push
the boundaries of innovation. The winning teams
are those which can travel the furthest on the least
amount of energy. Competitors regularly enter
vehicles capable of travelling more than 1,000 km
on a single litre of fuel. In 2015, one of the leading
vehicles was capable of travelling more than
2,500 km on 1 litre of fuel.

Project M

Shell lubricants experts are working closely with
leading car designer, Professor Gordon Murray,
and engine specialists, Geo Technology, to
co-engineer a compact, ultra-efficient concept car
for urban driving. Due for launch in April 2016,
it could help to advance efficient energy use in
transport if it is produced by a car manufacturer.

Electric mobility

We have taken part in electric mobility trials since
2013 with commercial partners in Germany, the
UK and the USA. In 2015, we took part in a trial in
California, USA, with San Diego Gas & Electric.
The trial integrated electric vehicles into California’s
wholesale energy market by aggregating the
storage capacity of electric vehicle fleets across
five locations.

A customer fills his car with hydrogen at one of Shell’s hydrogen fuelling stations
in Hamburg, Germany.

SOLAR AND WIND
TECHNOLOGIES

Solar and wind power
are playing a growing part
in meeting global energy
demand. At Shell, we expect
an emerging low-carbon
energy system to include traditional fuels
such as oil and natural gas alongside
renewable energy and carbon capture
and storage.
Shell has been involved in wind power
for more than a decade. We have interests
in eight operational wind power projects
in North America and one in Europe.
Our share of the energy capacity from
these projects is about 500 megawatts.
When designing the European wind farm,
we used our experience with oil and gas
platforms to ensure it could withstand
the harsh North Sea conditions. STV has
invested in 2-B Energy, a renewable energy
company, to support its two-blade turbine
wind technology and reduce the cost of
offshore wind power. (See page 18).
We are also exploring the possibilities offered
by solar power. Petroleum Development Oman
(PDO, Shell interest 34%) uses technology
developed by GlassPoint Solar – a company
in which Shell has invested – to reduce energy
consumption within its operations. GlassPoint
uses solar power to generate steam which is,
in turn, injected into wells to enhance the
recovery of oil.
PDO and GlassPoint are constructing a solar
thermal steam plant in Oman, called Project
Miraah. Once completed in 2020, Miraah
will be the world’s largest solar thermal steam
plant, providing about a third of the Amal
oilfield’s steam requirements. It will potentially
be capable of producing up to 1 gigawatt
of power. This solar technology will replace
gas-fired steam generation and free the gas
for other uses, to reduce the CO2 intensity
of the oil production. We are looking at
further opportunities to deploy both steam
and power using photovoltaic systems on
an industrial scale at oilfields in the Middle
East and California.
We also use renewable energy in our own
operations. This can result in significant cost
and CO2 savings. For example, in Pakistan
we installed a 100 kilowatt solar photovoltaic
system at our fuel depot in Karachi, generating
around 170 megawatt-hours of power each
year. This helps reduce diesel consumption
for back-up power generation.

21

MANAGING
OPERATIONS

The nature of the energy industry
means that we often operate in
challenging environments. We
work to reduce our environmental
impact and manage our operations
safely and responsibly, wherever
they may be.
This section describes those
operations identified by
stakeholders as of high interest
in 2015. It explains how we are
striving to improve our performance
in areas such as safety and reduce
our impact on the environment
and communities.

1.2

MILLION

Tonnes decrease of GHG emissions
from flaring compared with 2014

58%
Approximate reduction of number of operational
spills in Nigeria compared with 2014

85%
Water recycling rate in oil sands

We monitor our tight-gas operations in
line with our onshore operating principles.
An employee checks a pressure gauge
at Groundbirch, Canada.

MANAGING OPERATIONS
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

OUR ACTIVITIES IN ALASKA
In September 2015, we ended our offshore exploration drilling operations in Alaska
for the foreseeable future.
We drilled in Alaska’s outer
continental shelf during the summer
months of 2015. We successfully
met the regulatory safety and
environmental standards expected
of us. After safely drilling an exploration well in
the Burger prospect in the Chukchi Sea, we found
that there was insufficient oil for commercial
development. This, in part, led us to stop drilling
operations in Alaska for the foreseeable future.
This decision reflects the outcome of the Burger J well,
and the high costs associated with the project.
We support regulation that enforces high safety
and environmental standards. However, the
unpredictable federal regulatory environment for the
Alaska outer continental shelf also made it difficult
to operate efficiently. In the summer months of
2016, we will remove the remaining equipment
from the drilling sites in Alaska.
Currently, 6% of the world’s oil and gas comes
from the Arctic region, including Alaska, according
to Wood Mackenzie. We believe this region will
be an important source of energy in the future.
However, our drilling in Alaska was an issue that
divided public opinion: throughout our operations
there was a high level of litigation and environmental
activism in opposition to our drilling in the region.
While we maintained our focus on safe and
successful exploration in 2015, we recognised

the concerns of many international non-governmental
organisations who do not believe continued fossil
fuel extraction from the Arctic is necessary.

WORKING WITH COMMUNITIES

Our relationship with local communities, including
the indigenous peoples of Alaska’s North Slope,
the Iñupiats, played a key role in our operations
in Alaska. The Arctic Iñupiat Offshore (AIO) –
a company that includes some of Alaska’s North
Slope village corporations and the Arctic Slope
Village Corporation – took part in discussions
with Shell about potential impacts on their lifestyles
and livelihoods. Its president, Rex Rock, Sr., was
pivotal in the signing of an agreement between
AIO and Shell for its members to have an option
to share in future oil and gas production from
Shell’s Chukchi Sea leases.
An important part of our work with the Iñupiat
communities was to create opportunities for jobs
and to develop skills that were both sustainable
and transferable to other sectors that operate in
the region. Shell trained people from the community
in skills that included communications, observing
marine mammals, working on drill ships and
oil-spill response.

The drilling ship Polar Pioneer anchored in Dutch Harbor for the 2015 exploration season,
Alaska, USA.

ARCTIC SCIENCE

Our work in remote areas, such as the Arctic,
requires an in-depth understanding of the
region’s ecosystem, including its wildlife,
marine mammals and wetlands. Shell’s
chief environmental scientist for the Arctic,
Michael Macrander, has been leading our
research efforts over two decades to improve
our understanding of the Arctic and, in
particular, Alaska.
In Alaska, Shell set up and has funded since
2006, a science programme with the local
governments of the North Slope. As part of
the agreement, the Iñupiat communities were
able to choose subjects for scientific research
which included topics of research relating
to their traditional way of life.
The scientific research led to a deeper
understanding of the birds and mammals in
the Arctic region. The work provided insight
into migration patterns, the sensitivity of
aquatic species to man-made sounds and
important patterns of biodiversity.
For example, our science teams investigated
whether Shell’s work affected the migration
route of the bowhead whale. We found that
the bowhead whales tended to avoid areas
of seismic activity while on their established
migration path. Another scientific discovery –
one that the Iñupiat peoples had always
supported but western science had disputed –
was that the bowhead whale has a sense
of smell. These discoveries helped guide our
operations to have minimal impact on the
Iñupiat peoples’ subsistence activities.
This body of scientific research has established
an understanding of Arctic systems and the
effect of oil and gas operations on them.
The findings help to inform our operations
in other sensitive environments and minimise
our impacts on local biodiversity. We share
our science research with the industry and
regulators, and have published our findings
in academic journals.

23

24

MANAGING OPERATIONS
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

OUR ACTIVITIES IN NIGERIA
Incidents in 2015, including the continued theft of crude oil, reinforced the need to maintain
the highest standards of safety and security in Nigeria.
In 2015, the Shell Petroleum
Development Company of
Nigeria Ltd (SPDC), which is
the operator of the SPDC joint
venture (SPDC, Shell interest 30%),
divested its interest in three onshore
leases and a major pipeline.
Our performance metrics for
Nigeria this year reflect, in part,
these divestments.
Shell Companies in Nigeria (SCiN) recorded a
total of seven fatalities in 2015, in four separate
incidents. In one incident, four people lost their lives
while working to remove an illegal tap point from
a pipeline in the Niger Delta. The incident is being
investigated, in line with our procedures, and we
are taking steps to learn from what happened.
“This loss of life is a deeply troubling turn for SCiN
after no fatalities in 2014,” says Osagie Okunbor,
the Managing Director of SPDC and Country
Chair of SCiN. “Crude oil theft is a major issue,
with attacks not only on pipelines but increasingly
on flowlines and well heads.”
In the same year, the gas flared from SPDC JV
operations declined by 28% and flaring intensity
decreased by 15% from 2014, partly due to
divestments and also to their focus on gas
flare reduction. However, a lack of adequate
joint-venture funding from our government partner
has delayed planned start-up dates for two other
major gas gathering projects. (See page 28
for more on flaring).

SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
In 2015, the new Nigerian president stated that
he would prioritise the recommendations of the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
report on Ogoniland. The report called on the
Nigerian government, oil and gas companies
and communities to put an end to all forms of oil
contamination and to begin a comprehensive
clean-up of the region.

The government brought together a number
of parties including representatives of the Ogoni
Community who will work to move forward
with implementing the report’s recommendations.
An 18-month roadmap has been agreed by the
government, UNEP and SPDC which includes a
governance framework. SPDC fully supports the
UNEP report and remains committed to playing its
part in implementing the UNEP recommendations.
SPDC also announced a £55 million settlement
in 2015 with members of the Bodo community in
Nigeria regarding two operational spills in 2008.
Ongoing discussions are taking place with the
Bodo community to allow international contractors
to proceed with oil removal and clean-up. This is in
accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding
between the SPDC JV and the Bodo community.
SPDC is working on a number of initiatives
to prevent and minimise the impact of theft and
sabotage in Ogoniland, including community-based
pipeline surveillance, education and alternative
livelihood programmes. In 2015, SPDC introduced
new ways for the community to directly log complaints
or issues. This is intended to improve the company’s
communication with host communities.

SCiN hold interests in a number of offshore licences including the Shell-operated Bonga field.
Gulf of Guinea, Nigeria.

SPILLS AND RESPONSE DATA
SPDC continues work to clean up areas near
our facilities affected by spills irrespective of the
cause of the spills. The number of operational
spills fell from 37 in 2014 to 15 in 2015. The
volume of oil spilled in operational incidents
also fell, from 0.3 thousand tonnes of spills
volume to 0.2 thousand tonnes.
Theft of SPDC JV crude oil on the pipeline
network amounted to around 25 thousand
barrels of oil a day in 2015. This reduction
from around 37 thousand barrels of oil a day
in the previous year is partly due to continued
surveillance efforts and implementing antitheft
protection mechanisms on key equipment.
Since 2012, SPDC has removed more
than 850 illegal theft points.
The number of sabotage-related spills in
2015 declined to 93 compared with 139 in
2014. This decrease was due to divestments
in the Niger Delta and increased surveillance
and security by the Government of Nigeria.
However, theft and sabotage are still
the cause of around 85% of spills from
SPDC JV operations.
In total, 133 new sites requiring remediation
were identified in 2015, of which 23 were in
Ogoniland. Of the total of 305 sites identified
for remediation and certification at the start
of 2015, 184 have been remediated and
certified. 55 of these sites were in Ogoniland
(representing a net reduction of 29% in
remediation sites in that area during 2015).

MANAGING OPERATIONS

25

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

WORKING WITH COMMUNITIES

SCiN work with government, communities and
civil society to implement programmes that can
positively impact people’s lives in the Niger Delta
and in other parts of Nigeria. The programmes
focus on community and enterprise development,
education and health.
In 2015, SPDC JV and Shell Nigeria Exploration
& Production Co Ltd (SNEPCo) invested around
$10 million (Shell share around $3 million) in
scholarships and education programmes. Grants
were awarded to 930 secondary school students
and 638 university undergraduates during 2015.
Ten postgraduate scholarships were also awarded
to students from Rivers, Bayelsa and Delta states
to study engineering and geosciences at
international universities.
The cradle to career programme enrolled 60 new
students in 2015. The programme was launched
in 2010 to pay for children from rural communities
in the Niger Delta to attend some of the country’s
leading secondary schools. Over five years,
410 places have been awarded.
SPDC JV has supported community health in the
Niger Delta since the 1980s: the Obio Cottage
Hospital in Port Harcourt, set up by SPDC JV,
has become one of the most visited health
facilities in the region. This is due to a community
health-insurance scheme which was the first of

its kind for the Niger Delta. More than 45,000
people had been enrolled in the SPDC JV community
health-insurance scheme at Obio Cottage Hospital
by the end of 2015. In total, more than 550,000
host communities have benefited from outreach
programmes between 2007 and 2015. The SPDC JV
supports 18 health centres in the Niger Delta
and SNEPCo supports two centres outside the
Niger Delta.
SNEPCo will also be collaborating with Project
Gaia Prospects, an international non-governmental
organisation to conduct a year-long pilot study
to promote the use of clean cookstoves in Lagos
households. SNEPCo will provide 2,500 clean
cookstoves in 2016.
LiveWIRE, Shell’s youth entrepreneurship
programme, has now been extended beyond
the Niger Delta to include Lagos, with 255
trainees, and 126 business grants awarded in
2015. In total, 6,290 people have been trained
under the programme between 2003 and
2015 and 3,183 grants awarded.
SPDC JV also provides funds for communities as
part of its global memorandum of understanding
(GMoU), where projects are nominated by
community groups. To date, 35 GMoUs are
in place covering 359 host communities, with
the Ogulagha cluster of communities joining
in 2015.

External opinion
“SPDC and its joint-venture partners
provide funds to support projects that are
nominated by community groups under
the GMoU agreement. SPDC was
prepared to fund a marine services
business for the Andoni Cluster, which is
made up of 22 Niger Delta communities.
This would enable the community-led
enterprises to provide marine services
to SPDC.
We invested the GMoU funds in a ship.
Today, we have a vessel that is
contracted to Shell and operating in the
Santa Barbara field. This initiative has
been a huge support to the communities
in the Andoni Cluster and has employed
seven young people. However, it would
be simpler if payments were made direct
to the community enterprise rather than
through the marine services contractor.”

Chief (Hon) Gad Harry
Ekpirikpo (JP)

SHELL’S ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTION

In addition to SPDC and SNEPCo, Shell also holds interests in a number of offshore licences
including the Shell-operated Bonga field (Shell interest 55%). Shell also has a 25.6% interest in
Nigeria Liquefied Natural Gas (NLNG), which exports LNG around the world.
$42 billion:

economic contribution from SPDC JV partners to the Nigerian government 2011–2015.

$1.1 billion:	Shell share of royalties and corporate taxes paid to the Nigerian government in 2015
(SPDC $0.6 billion; SNEPCo $0.5 billion).
93%:

SCiN contracts awarded to Nigerian companies.

$0.9 billion:

SCiN spend on local contracting and procurement.

94%:

employees of SCiN are Nigerian (data as of October 2015).

$145.1 million:	SPDC JV and SNEPCo contribution to Niger Delta Development Commission
in 2015 (Shell share $62.3 million).
$50.4 million:	SPDC JV and SNEPCo direct spending on social investment projects in 2015
(Shell share $15.4 million).

Chairman, Andoni Cluster
GMoU Foundation
Andoni Local Government Area,
Rivers State Nigeria

“

26

MANAGING OPERATIONS
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

TIGHT GAS AND OIL
Tight gas and oil continue to play an important role in meeting global energy demand.
We use advanced, proven technologies, including hydraulic fracturing, and follow
our global operating principles to unlock these resources safely and responsibly.
Tight gas and oil resources are
trapped in microscopic pores
of very dense shale or sandstone
rock, normally thousands of metres
underground. Hydraulic fracturing
has been used for many years in the oil and gas
industry to extract tight gas and oil. The process
fractures the rock and releases the gas and oil
into the well.
The US Energy Information Agency states that
tight gas and oil in the USA has boosted the
production of natural gas by around 35% since
2005. This has reduced the need for gas imports.
The increased use of these resources instead
of coal in North America has helped to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions.

ONSHORE OPERATING PRINCIPLES

Some communities and environmental groups
have raised concerns about the use of hydraulic
fracturing. These groups question the high volumes
of water used, the risk of chemical release into
water sources and the potential release of
methane gas or other chemicals into the air.

In 2011, we developed and publicly shared
a set of five global principles that govern the
onshore tight or shale gas and oil activities where
we operate and where hydraulic fracturing is used.
The principles cover safety, air quality, water
protection and use, land use and engagement
with local communities. We encourage regulations
that set comparable standards. The principles are
reviewed and updated as new technologies,
challenges and regulatory requirements emerge.
We share our global onshore operating
principles publicly.
Each of our projects takes into account the local
context – including the geology of the area and
impacts such as noise and traffic – and we then
design our activities to suit the local conditions.
We have implemented technologies that reduce the
environmental impact of tight gas and oil activities,
including capturing methane emissions and improving
the detection and repair of leaks. (See page 27).

COLLABORATION

We strive to be transparent in our activities and work
in partnership with communities and others in the
industry to bring about improvements in the sector.

For example, in the USA, we collaborate with the
Center for Sustainable Shale Development (CSSD)
and its members. These include environmental
organisations, foundations and oil and gas companies.
CSSD has developed 15 voluntary performance
standards covering air quality, water resources and
climate. Our tight-gas operations in the Appalachia
region received CSSD certification in 2015.
We also work with the Environmental Protection
Agency in the USA to contribute to discussions on
effective regulations and programmes to reduce
emissions. Significant reductions are being achieved
by a combination of existing regulation and
voluntary efforts by the industry.
Throughout 2015, Shell worked closely with
industry, regulators and academics in Western
Canada to address concerns about emerging risks
of induced seismicity associated with hydraulic
fracturing. Shell is working with industry partners,
through the Canadian Association of Petroleum
Producers, to develop best practice that includes
monitoring, mitigation and response procedures
to avoid or minimise seismicity potentially
associated with hydraulic fracturing.

LISTENING AND RESPONDING

There remain some concerns about the development
of tight gas and oil resources due to the use of
hydraulic fracturing. (See table).

LISTENING AND RESPONDING TO COMMUNITY CONCERNS
Concerns raised by communities

Shell operating principles

Examples in practice

Chemicals could be released
into local water sources.

We always have at least two physical barriers in the
section of the well that passes through the potable
groundwater aquifer, to prevent the production stream
from mixing with potable groundwater.

In Appalachia, USA, we test the quality of water wells around
our sites both before and after drilling to ensure we can detect
any changes.

High volumes of water are
used in hydraulic fracturing
which can compete with
other local water needs.

We design our operations to reduce the use of potable
water and to use non-potable water as far as
reasonably practical.

Our Fox Creek operations in Canada have an agreement
with the town to use their treated waste water in our operations.
In 2015, we used around 60% alternative or waste water sources
in our Fox Creek operations. Shell also funded a design study
to upgrade the town’s natural water facilities.

Methane gas and other
chemicals could be released
into the air from hydraulic
fracturing sites.

At many locations, we monitor production facilities and
pipelines for fugitive emissions. This may be done by
pressure testing, visual observation, infrared testing
or other emerging technologies.

In Appalachia, USA, we introduced a number of voluntary
measures at our sites to reduce methane emissions. These
exceeded local, state and federal air quality regulations.
Around 90% of our surface facilities have low-emission
devices to reduce fugitive emissions.

Noise and traffic could affect
local communities.

We work to understand and reduce the impact of
our operations on communities, wildlife and livestock.
This includes limiting our activities during specific times.

At our sites in Permian, USA, we invested in pipelines and
water recycling facilities. This has significantly reduced the
number of trucks coming to our site.

Effects of operational land use
on local communities.

We assess the impacts of our operations on the social
and economic aspects of the community and find ways
to reduce the effects and identify the opportunities.

Shell proactively engages with First Nations in Canada to
understand traditional land use and help reduce impacts on
culturally-sensitive areas or areas used for traditional purposes
such as fishing and hunting.

Hydraulic fracturing activity
could cause seismic events
that damage infrastructure
and threaten public safety.

Shell analyses publicly available seismic, geological
and geophysical data to determine historical seismicity
in areas where we plan to operate. If seismic activity
beyond historic levels is detected, we will investigate
and review our operations.

We support appropriate local regulations based on local
geology and surface conditions, to manage the risk of induced
seismicity in areas where we operate. To date, we have not
experienced any induced seismic events from our Shell-operated
water injection or hydraulic fracturing activities in North America.
We have also introduced guidelines to help avoid or minimise
induced seismicity.

MANAGING OPERATIONS
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

MANAGING METHANE EMISSIONS
An important part of the effort to tackle climate change is to cut methane emissions. Shell
is using specialist equipment to find methane emission sources quickly and cost effectively.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) has estimated that around 370 million tonnes
of methane are released into the atmosphere each
year from man-made sources which, on a carbon
dioxide (CO2) equivalent basis, makes up about 20%
of total global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
Methane is more potent than CO2; it has 34
times the global warming potential of CO2 over a
100-year time frame, according to the IPCC AR5
report. Reductions in methane emissions today will
help to slow the rate of global temperature rise,
as methane remains in the atmosphere for a
much shorter time than CO2.
The regulation of methane emissions varies
among countries. Shell and the industry are
working with governments to highlight the
challenges and help find the most cost-effective
and efficient solutions for methane management.
Any solutions should be informed by robust
data and peer-reviewed science.

METHANE IN OIL AND
GAS PRODUCTION

Methane emissions associated with oil and natural
gas production tend to occur in four main areas:
combustion (emissions of unburnt methane from
fuel combustion); flaring (where the flaring itself
fails to burn all the methane); venting (including from
equipment); and unintended emissions (for example,
small leaks sometimes called fugitive emissions).

Reports by the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF)
and the International Energy Agency have shown
that gas used in power generation will continue
to have lower total GHG emissions than coal,
as long as methane leakage throughout the natural
gas supply chain is less than 3% or 8% respectively.
(The variation is due to assumptions made
about how long methane emissions endure in the
atmosphere.) The Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) in the USA estimates that total methane
emissions in the natural gas supply chain – as a
percentage of the global total volume of natural
gas produced – are around 1.3%. This takes into
account methane leaks during gas processing
and transmission through pipelines for
power generation.

Collaborating to reduce emissions

Shell has collaborated on academic studies to
better understand methane life-cycle emissions.
In 2014, we participated in a University of Texas
and EDF assessment of methane emissions from
tight-gas production in the USA. Recommendations
from the study have been used as input for our
programme to improve or replace equipment to
reduce our methane emissions.
Shell has been a partner with the EPA Natural Gas
STAR programme since 1995. The programme
encourages oil and gas companies to adopt
cost-effective technologies and practices that
improve operational efficiency to reduce

Shell is using infrared cameras to scan for methane emissions so that leaks can be repaired.
Appalachia, Pennsylvania.

methane emissions. It also encourages the
introduction of internal voluntary measures such
as Shell’s onshore operating principles.
(See page 26).

OUR PERFORMANCE

In 2015, methane emissions contributed less than
5% of Shell’s GHG emissions on a CO2 equivalent
basis. We recognise that it is important to reduce
methane emissions from our operations. Methane
from flaring and venting in our Upstream operations
represented more than 45% of our reported
methane in 2015. (For our flare reduction work,
see page 28).
There are also concerns that tight-gas production
could cause fugitive emissions. Our reported
methane emissions from the production of tight gas
in 2015 were less than 0.5% of the gas produced
from these assets. We have leak detection and
repair programmes across our sites to identify
unintended emissions or equipment that has high
emissions so they can be replaced or repaired.
Following successful pilots in the USA, Shell is
now deploying advanced leak detection and
repair technology using infrared cameras to
scan for methane emissions.
Shell continues to work to identify all potential
methane sources to help reduce our emissions.
We report our methane emissions from these
sources according to regulations and industry
standards. We also monitor work in the industry
for more accurate reporting methods.

27

MANAGING OPERATIONS

28

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

FLARING
The flaring of natural gas produced with oil wastes valuable resources and contributes
to climate change. At Shell, we are working hard to minimise flaring associated with
oil and gas production.
When oil is extracted from a reservoir, gas is
produced as the oil is brought to the surface.
Operational flaring is sometimes carried out for
safety reasons. However, continuous flaring occurs
when there are no facilities to capture the gas –
this wastes valuable energy resources and
releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Shell’s policy is to reduce any continuous flaring
or venting at our operations to a level as low as
technically and financially feasible. We also aim
to minimise operational flaring required for safety
reasons such as during the start-up of a new facility.
Our flaring policy is set out in our health, safety,
security, environment and social performance
(HSSE & SP) Control Framework, including the
requirement that new facilities are designed
so as not to continuously flare or vent.
Shell has been an active member of the World
Bank sponsored Global Gas Flaring Reduction
(GGFR) partnership since 2002. This public-private
partnership promotes and facilitates progress in
reducing flaring by working collaboratively to
find alternative uses for gas that would otherwise
be flared. As part of the GGFR partnership, the
World Bank has developed a Zero Routine Flaring
by 2030 initiative to encourage governments,
companies and development organisations to work
closely together to end continuous flaring. Shell
joined the initiative in April 2015 before it was
launched. The initiative aims to identify ways to
use associated gas from projects at the design
stage – for example, to generate electricity
for local communities.

OUR PERFORMANCE

In 2015, we reduced flaring from facilities we operate
from the level reported in 2014 despite an increase
in flaring levels in Malaysia in line with increased oil
production in 2015. More than 90% of our flaring
occurs in Iraq, Nigeria, Malaysia and Qatar.
In Iraq, flaring decreased slightly in 2015 as Shell
Iraq Petroleum Development (Shell interest 45%)

million tonnes CO2 equivalent
30

15

0

08 09 10

The flaring volume from Shell Petroleum
Development Company’s (SPDC) joint-venture
facilities in Nigeria was reduced by 85% between
2002 and 2015. The flaring intensity (the amount
of gas flared for every tonne of oil and gas
produced) was reduced by around 70% over the
same period. Flaring from SPDC facilities decreased
in 2015, due to divestments and improved
operations at our assets. Progress was also made
on several gas-gathering projects, which are now
at advanced stages of completion. For example,
we have installed a gas-gathering plant at the
Oloma Station that is ready for final commissioning.
However, the planned start-up dates for two other
major gas gathering projects have been delayed
due to a lack of adequate joint-venture funding
from our government partner.
Flaring increased in Malaysia, due to increased oil
production at Gumusut Kakap (Shell interest 33%)
which started production in 2014. The associated
gas was flared until reinjection equipment was
ready for use in October 2015. The gas is now
injected back into the hydrocarbon reservoir
from which it came.
At our Pearl gas-to-liquids (GTL) plant in Qatar,
flaring takes place for operational reasons. In 2015,
our flaring decreased due to lower activity while
maintenance and enhancements to the plant took
place. This helped lower operational flaring by
using more waste gas for electricity generation.
We expect our overall flaring levels to continue
to decline in 2016 as the gas-gathering facilities
in Iraq and Malaysia become operational.

WIDER FLARE REDUCTION EFFORTS

FLARING – UPSTREAM

06 07

safely delivered the first phase of a gas-capturing
system at our Majnoon facilities. When the second
phase is complete, the project will capture about
65% of the gas that would otherwise be flared.
The start-up of this project marks a significant
milestone in our efforts to reduce gas flaring
at Majnoon and deliver natural gas for power
generation for the people of Iraq.

11

12

13

14

15

Basrah Gas Company (BGC, Shell interest 44%)
is a joint venture with South Gas Company and
Mitsubishi. It captures associated gas that would
otherwise be flared from three non-operated
oil fields in southern Iraq (Rumaila, West Qurna
1 and Zubair) for use in the domestic market.
BGC recently achieved a record production of
515 million standard cubic feet of gas each day.
If used for power generation, this would be enough
to power more than 3.5 million homes. In 2015,
BGC in Iraq and SPDC in Nigeria received awards
from the World Bank Group for their flare reduction
work. (See external opinion).

External opinion
“Gas flaring at oil production sites
around the globe has been steadily
declining for several years. However,
progress has been too slow, particularly
when the world is demanding strong
climate action and when many oil
producing countries have severe energy
shortages. If the amount of gas flared
globally was instead used for power
generation, it could produce more
electricity than the whole of Africa
currently consumes.
In 2015, the World Bank introduced
a new initiative – Zero Routine Flaring
by 2030 – to accelerate efforts to
reduce global gas flaring. Shell
demonstrated leadership by endorsing
the initiative before its official launch in
Washington, D.C. Its endorsement was
an impetus for other oil companies to
join. We expect Shell to continue its
progressive, proactive role to turn the
initiative into action.
The Zero Routine Flaring by 2030
initiative means new oil fields will be
developed with solutions that avoid
flaring or venting. Existing legacy flaring
must end as soon as possible and
no later than 2030. In late 2015,
Shell received a Global Gas Flaring
Reduction Partnership Excellence Award
for its achievements in Iraq and Nigeria.
We look forward to continuing our
partnership towards a more sustainable
energy future.”

Bjørn Håmsø

Programme Manager, Global Gas
Flaring Reduction Partnership,
World Bank, Washington D.C., USA

“

MANAGING OPERATIONS
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

OIL SANDS
Canada’s oil sands in Alberta and Saskatchewan are among the largest oil reserves in the
world. In 2015, we opened the Quest carbon capture and storage (CCS) facility in Alberta
to reduce our carbon dioxide emissions.
Oil sands are a mixture of sand,
water, clay and heavy oil called
bitumen. Shell has a 60% interest
in the Athabasca Oil Sands Project
(AOSP) which includes Shell Albian
Sands (Muskeg River and Jackpine
mines) and the Scotford Upgrader,
which processes bitumen into
synthetic crude oil. During 2015,
we improved efficiency in water
and energy use. This was part of our ambition to
become more economically and environmentally
resilient and competitive.
In 2015, we took the decision to stop construction
of our Carmon Creek oil sands project in Alberta.

MANAGING GHG EMISSIONS

Oil sands emit 4–23% more greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions – from production through to use as a
transport fuel – than the average crude oil used in the
USA, according to research in 2013 by Cambridge
Energy Research Associates. Since the start-up
of the Quest CCS in 2015, the GHG intensity of
Shell’s oil sands operation has decreased. These
emissions are now closer to the average GHG
emissions of North American oil. (See page 19).

Overall, we have reduced our energy intensity
by 8%. Two programmes are currently in place at
Albian: one uses waste heat from tailings to reduce
the demand for steam; and the other programme
has installed a pressure-reducing turbine that
converts steam to electricity. We also explore
advanced energy-efficiency techniques with other
oil sands producers through our membership of
Canada’s Oil Sands Innovation Alliance (COSIA)
– an organisation that aims to accelerate the
development of environmental technologies by
sharing information among oil sands operators.
In 2015, the government of Alberta announced a
new climate plan, which affects the oil and natural
gas industry, and includes a carbon-pricing regime
and an emissions limit for the oil sands. This is
a policy that aligns with our own advocacy
to support carbon pricing. (See page 14).

WATER USE AND RECYCLING

Oil sands mining operations require water to
separate bitumen from the sand. Shell is committed
to exploring ways to minimise water use in our
oil sands operations. We use water efficiently and
recycle as much as possible: in 2015, we increased
water recycling in our mines by 3%.

We carefully manage our tailings to prevent contamination of local surface water
and groundwater. Albian Sands, Alberta, Canada.

Reductions in our water use are due to a number
of efforts. This includes increased tailings monitoring
and increased reclamation capacity by transferring
processed water between the mines.

TAILINGS

The separation of bitumen from sand creates tailings
– a mixture of water, sand, clay and residual
hydrocarbons, as well as naturally occurring traces
of heavy metals and other chemicals. Tailings are
stored in ponds to allow the sand to settle at the
bottom, so that the water can be recycled and the
solids can be used for reclamation. We carefully
manage our tailings to prevent contamination of
local surface-water courses and groundwater.
Tailings ponds at the Muskeg River and Jackpine
mines covered 42.9 km2 at the end of 2015. This is
in line with the planned development of the mines,
as the size of the ponds has increased to support
ongoing production and facilitate reclamation
of older ponds.
The Alberta government has introduced a new
Tailings Management Framework to minimise the
growth of tailings ponds and accelerate reclamation.
Shell supports these regulations. We have invested
approximately C$465 million during the past
decade to develop technologies that speed up
the drying process for fluid fine tailings, and have
processed around 3.4 million cubic metres of
fluid fine tailings during that period. In 2015,
we processed around 5.1 million cubic metres
of fluid fine tailings at our Athabasca site.

INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES

Shell has been working closely with indigenous
communities in Canada for many years to reduce
the impact of oil sands development on traditional
land use and culture, as well as bring benefits to
these communities. Since 2005, Shell has spent
more than C$1.8 billion with local indigenous
contracting companies (See page 46).

RECLAMATION

We aim to reclaim the land used in our oil sands
mines by refilling the mined-out areas with dried
tailings and restoring the contours of disturbed land.
We will then place topsoil and plant suitable
vegetation on the sites in question. Reclamation
is an integral part of our mine development.
We work with local and indigenous communities on
our reclamation work. To date, Shell has salvaged
and stockpiled nearly 47 million cubic metres of soil
for future reclamation. A total of 185 hectares of
land has been permanently reclaimed at our
Albian mines.

29

OUR
PERFORMANCE
Each year, we measure our
performance: we assess the safety
of our operations and our impact
on the environment, including our
greenhouse gas emissions and
energy intensity. This helps us to
improve our operations and strive
towards our Goal Zero ambition
of no harm and no leaks.
We also work closely with
communities near our operations
to address concerns and we
contribute in areas such as
local employment.
This section provides information on
our safety, economic, environmental
and social performance in 2015.

186

MILLION CUBIC METRES

Fresh water used in our operations

0.94
Total recordable case frequency
of injuries

$122

MILLION

Spent on voluntary social investment

Pearl GTL is the world’s largest source
of gas-to-liquids products. It produces
up to 140,000 barrels of GTL products
each day. Ras Laffan, Qatar.

OUR PERFORMANCE

31

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

SAFETY
We work to deliver energy responsibly and safely, while looking after our employees,
contractors, local communities and the environment. We strive to improve safety performance
throughout the energy industry.
Our ambition of Goal Zero is to achieve no
harm and no leaks across all of our projects and
operations. To accomplish this goal, we focus on
the three areas of safety which have the highest
risks for our type of activities: personal, process
and transport safety.
We have consistent, high safety standards and
requirements across Shell that all our employees
and contractors must meet, no matter where they
work. These standards apply to any joint ventures
that we operate. We work relentlessly to strengthen
our safety culture and leadership, with the focus on
caring for people. We learn from incidents within
Shell and other companies. Our approach is
to reduce safety risks as far as technically and
financially feasible, and to minimise the potential
impacts of an incident.

PERSONAL SAFETY

Everyone who works for us, or with us, has an
important part to play in making Shell a safer
place to work. We have been working to create
an environment in which our employees and
contractors take personal responsibility for achieving
Goal Zero. This is more than a culture of compliance,
but one in which people feel looked after. Our aim
is to have a more motivated, productive, healthier
and safer workforce.
All employees and contractors must follow Shell’s
12 Life-Saving Rules, which cover the most critical
safety hazards that have caused loss of life in our
activities. We introduced the rules in 2009 and
have since achieved a notable reduction in fatalities
and injuries. Personal responsibility also extends
to intervening to prevent unsafe conditions, and
respecting fellow workers and the communities
in which we work.
The safety of our contractors is an important area
of focus, as we have a large contractor workforce
which often performs activities with higher safety
risks. (See page 46). We work with our contractor
partners to ensure they understand our safety
requirements and expectations, and we help them
to build skills and expertise where needed.

For example, Shell is the world’s largest contractor
of vessels, with around 1,300 on the water on
any given day. We introduced a safety programme
to encourage contractor partners and the industry
to share their knowledge and experiences. This
has led to better leadership and safety behaviour.
The number of serious or potential incidents has
been reduced by more than half within Shell since
2011. In 2015, the programme won a Shell CEO’s
HSSE & SP award which recognises outstanding
performance in safety.

PROCESS SAFETY

Process safety starts at the early phase of designing
and building facilities and continues throughout their
life cycle, making sure they are operated safely,
well maintained and inspected regularly. Our
global technical and operational safety standards
are in place to ensure that hazardous materials
are safely contained. If an incident happens,
we learn from it to help prevent any similar
incidents from occurring again.
We also make sure that we have the necessary
resources to deal with spills, leaks, fires and
explosions. Our emergency-response plans
are routinely tested and improved after
simulation exercises.

TRANSPORT SAFETY

Aviation, rail, maritime and road transport
activities to move people, product and equipment
are an area of risk within our industry. Risks vary
across different types of transport. We develop
best-practice standards within Shell, and work
with specialist contractors and industry bodies,
where needed. For example, we are focusing
on reducing the risks involved when we load
and unload product. (For more on road
transport see page 32).

External opinion
“Effective safety management
requires more than engineering skills:
it needs to be complemented with
an understanding of human factors
and organisational behaviour. Shell
appreciates that a broad scientific
perspective is essential for risk control
and regularly sponsors psychological
research on safety.
Our projects at the University of
Aberdeen – based on platforms,
rigs and tankers – have provided
insights into what makes a good safety
leader. This led to the development of
an appraisal tool for the energy industry
that Shell made publicly available.
Recently, we studied how Shell
managers remain vigilant and
respectful of operational risks, even
when everything is apparently running
smoothly. This kind of behavioural
research shows the willingness of
a company to be self-critical. It is
a powerful component for sustaining
operational and process safety.”

Rhona Flin

Emeritus Professor of Applied
Psychology, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, UK

“

OUR PERFORMANCE

32

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

SAFETY CONTINUED
SAFETY IN DEEP WATER

Shell has a long history of working safely in
deep water – that is, offshore oil or gas production
at depths greater than 300 metres. Today,
technological advances enable us to work in
water up to 10 times that depth.
At Shell, as we operate in deeper and more
challenging environments, we continually review
our procedures, improve our equipment and
develop the skills of our employees. For example,
Phase 3 of our Malampaya gas project off the
coast of the Philippines, which started up in 2015,
is supported by a specialist health, safety and
environment (HSE) training centre. More than
6,000 Filipinos have been trained to the highest
HSE standards at the centre since 2013.
At our training centre in Louisiana, USA, we have
equipment and simulators that replicate normal and
emergency conditions on an offshore deep-water
platform. This allows us to provide new operators
with the necessary skills to work safely offshore and
to reduce their training time from around three years
to eight months.

OIL-SPILL RESPONSE

We regularly test our oil-spill emergency response
procedures and capability to ensure employees
and contractors can respond rapidly to an incident.
We continue to work with the oil and gas industry
to further develop effective oil-spill emergency
response capabilities.

Shell is a founding member of the Marine Well
Containment Company (MWCC), which is
designed to respond to a deep-water well control
incident in the Gulf of Mexico, USA. The MWCC
can cap or contain wells at depths of more than
3,000 metres. MWCC continues to make upgrades
and enhancements to its cap and containment
systems, including developing equipment that has
higher temperature and pressure capabilities.
Shell is also a founding member of the Subsea
Well Response Project, backed by nine major
companies. The project has deep-water wellcapping and spill-response equipment in Brazil,
Norway, Singapore and South Africa. In early
2015, new well containment equipment – designed
to capture oil from a leaking well if other systems
fail – was made available to member companies
around the world.

RAISING INDUSTRY STANDARDS

We want to help improve safety performance
throughout the energy industry. Shell works in
partnership with industry associations and other
professional groups to share our safety experience
and standards with other operators and contractors.
These include the International Association of
Oil & Gas Producers, the American Petroleum
Institute (API) and the Society of Petroleum
Engineers. We also work with other third parties,
such as the Energy Institute in the UK, to promote
industry-leading research into safety culture in
organisations, safety leadership and how best
to learn from incidents.

Everyone working at Shell must take responsibility for achieving Goal Zero.
Caroline, Alberta, Canada.

The Center for Offshore Safety (COS), sponsored
by the API and of which Shell is a member, is an
example of collaboration between the industry
and regulators to continuously improve safety and
environmental performance in the Gulf of Mexico.
Safety and environmental management systems of
COS members are audited and certified by third
parties. Member companies also co-operate to
learn from their best practices and experiences.
For example, Shell has been participating in
an analysis of safety incidents involving lifting
and hoisting.

ROAD SAFETY

Road safety is a global concern. The World
Health Organisation states that there are around
1.25 million deaths each year from road traffic
incidents. Shell is always working to improve
road safety among our drivers in the 70
countries where we operate, with a greater
focus on countries that have a higher risk.
Our road safety approach focuses on the skills
and behaviour of the driver, the condition of
the vehicle, the local environment and road
conditions. These are supported by activities
such as our global mandatory road safety
training programme for drivers as well as by
routine audits of our contractor road safety
capabilities. Since introducing our first global
driver safety programmes in 2008, there
has been a significant decline in fatal road
incidents across Shell. We recorded no road
fatalities across our own operations in 2015.
Our employees and drivers are required
to follow Shell’s Life-Saving Rules at all times.
These include following a prescribed route for
road journeys, wearing a seat belt, not using
mobile phones or any other devices while
driving and adhering to speed limits. Monitoring
systems are in place in many of our vehicles
to give drivers feedback and coaching on
their driving performance. We also try to
reduce road transport risks by reducing the
number of journeys – using buses to transport
employees, and marine vessels and trains
to transport equipment.
We think it is important to share our experience
of effective road safety with governments
and non-governmental organisations, and to
learn from others. We are board members
of the Network of Employers for Traffic Safety
and the Global Road Safety Partnership.
(See page 39). We also learn from and share
our knowledge with companies outside of
the oil and gas industry.

OUR PERFORMANCE

33

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

SAFETY PERFORMANCE

■■

Our safety performance in 2015 was mixed,
as described below.
■■

Personal safety

In 2015, following steady and significant
improvements in our safety performance over
the past decade, we achieved our lowest ever
number of injuries per million working hours –
the total recordable case frequency (TRCF). We
also achieved our lowest ever level of injuries that
led to time off work in 2015, measured as lost
time injury frequency (LTIF).
Sadly, seven people lost their lives while working
for Shell in 2015; four of them during one single
operational incident. Our fatal accident rate (FAR)
– the number of fatalities per 100 million hours
worked – increased in 2015 after many years of
significant improvement. We investigate and learn
from these incidents – along with any significant
near misses – to reduce the risk of harm.

Process safety

A process safety incident is any leak or spill
of hazardous material. In line with industry
standards, we measure and report according to
the significance of the incidents, with Tier 1 as the
most significant. In 2015, we achieved our lowest
ever total for both Tier 1 and 2 operational process
safety events: 51 Tier 1 occurrences in 2015
(57 in 2014) and 169 Tier 2 in 2015 (194 in 2014).
Process safety events that are related to sabotage
and theft in Nigeria are recorded separately.
There was an improvement during 2015 with
fewer incidents: 28 Tier 1 and 17 Tier 2 events
(91 Tier 1 and 48 Tier 2 in 2014).
In 2015, the six most significant operational
incidents were:
■■

■■

■■

four fatalities during a pipeline repair (Nigeria);
a gas release from the Curlew offshore
production facility (UK);

■■

a fire at a furnace at the Rhineland refinery
(Germany);

SECURITY

We carefully assess the security threats
and risks to our operations. We work with
governments and partners to safeguard
our assets and provide a secure working
environment for our employees and contractors.

a fire at the Bukom refinery (Singapore); and
a gas release from a subsea reinjection
pipeline (UK).

Safety in the community

Shell only uses armed security in countries
where the threats are greatest, or if it is
a requirement under local laws. The use
of armed security reflects greater threats,
mostly due to increased geopolitical
volatility in certain parts of the world.

The Groningen gas field in the Netherlands is
operated by Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij
B.V. (NAM, Shell interest 50%) and is one of the
largest onshore gas fields in Europe. Earthquakes
occur in the province of Groningen as a result of
gas production. Following the Huizinge earthquake
in August 2012, new insights emerged about the
potential intensity of future earthquakes. NAM
is in discussions with the local communities about
their concerns regarding safety and the uncertainties
about the future.

We implement the Voluntary Principles
on Security and Human Rights (VPSHR) in
our operations – and with companies with
whom we co-operate – to reduce the risk
to employees, contractors and communities
of human rights violations by the security
forces. Our security plans are validated by
independent audits and assurance checks.

An extensive study is in progress to better
understand seismic risk in the area. Several
international universities and researchers are
involved, with the final report expected in 2016.
Interim results from November 2015 include a
seismic risk assessment which demonstrates that
all production levels analysed meet the acceptable
risk boundaries set by the Netherlands Ministry
of Economic Affairs.

Our security risk management plans are part
of our efforts to minimise negative impacts on
communities and the environment. We work
alongside governments, companies and
non-governmental organisations who are
involved in the VPSHR initiative to increase
adoption of the principles.

Since 2012, the ministry has set gas production
reduction measures, including a production limit.
A range of actions has been taken to improve
safety, liveability and economic prospects in the
region. NAM is working hard, together with all
relevant parties, to fulfil commitments to the residents
of the area. A long-term programme has been
developed by the National Coordinator for
Groningen to work with regional authorities and
residents on issues such as improving the handling
of claims and resolution of disputes. NAM is
publicly sharing information on its progress and
publishes earthquake measurements.

a crude oil spill from an onshore well (Nigeria);

FATAL ACCIDENT RATE (FAR)
fatalities per 100 million working hours
6

TOTAL RECORDABLE CASE
FREQUENCY (TRCF)

LOST TIME INJURY FREQUENCY (LTIF)

injuries per million working hours

injuries per million working hours

3.0

1.50

1.5

0.75

0

0

4
2
0

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

13

14

15

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

13

14

15

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

13

14

15

OUR PERFORMANCE

34

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ENVIRONMENT
We carefully consider the potential environmental impact of our activities and how local
communities might be affected throughout the lifetime of a facility.
Our approach is to comply with all environmental
regulations, to improve our performance continually
in line with best practice, and to prepare to respond
to future challenges and opportunities. We use
external standards and guidelines, such as those
developed by the World Bank and International
Finance Corporation, to inform our approach.
We have global environmental standards that
include a focus on managing our emissions,
minimising our use of fresh water and conserving
biodiversity. Within our operations, we also focus
on reducing our energy use, flaring less gas and
preventing spills and leaks.

OUR STANDARDS

Our environmental standards are detailed in our
health, safety, security, environment and social
performance (HSSE & SP) Control Framework.
Shell standards are applied to joint ventures of
which we are the operator. We also encourage our
joint-venture partners to apply materially equivalent
standards at ventures we do not operate. Our
projects and operated facilities comply with local
environmental regulations and our own standards.
Whenever we plan new projects, we carry out
detailed assessments of the potential environmental,
social and health impacts. These assessments
help us to manage and reduce impacts on the
environment and communities during construction,
operation and, when relevant, decommissioning.
We make the results of these assessments
available to the public when we are legally
and contractually permitted to do so.
For example, LNG Canada (Shell interest 50%) has
conducted a number of studies since 2012 on the
potential impacts of its proposed project to build a
liquefied natural gas (LNG) export facility in Kitimat,
western Canada. The studies reviewed the potential
impact of the project on the environment and local
community, including its economy, health and cultural
heritage. It involved meetings with people affected
by the potential project, including aboriginal groups,
local communities and government regulators. The
full assessment has been approved by the regulatory
authorities with letters of support from the community,
and First Nations whose traditional territory would
be affected by the project. Its recommendations
will be implemented if the proposed LNG plant
is built and operated.

SENSITIVE AREAS

We work to avoid impacts on biodiversity when
developing new projects. In some cases, our projects
can affect local biodiversity and the communities
who rely on its biodiversity for their livelihoods.
We develop comprehensive biodiversity action
plans to assess and mitigate the extent to which
local biodiversity and communities may be affected
by operations in critical habitats. For example, at our
Corrib facility in Ireland, we constructed a pipeline
tunnel under an estuary to minimise the impact on
land and water habitats.
We partner with major conservation organisations,
such as the International Union for Conservation
of Nature, The Nature Conservancy, Wetlands
International and Earthwatch. We seek their
guidance on how best to protect natural habitats.
(See page 47).

PROTECTING OCEANS

The biodiversity of the world’s oceans is at risk from
a range of different challenges, including overfishing,
climate change and pollution from plastics. We
combine science and knowledge from local
communities to enhance our understanding of the
marine environments in which we operate. We also
train people in communities to help protect marine
mammals off the coast in countries where we are
active, for example, in New Zealand and Colombia.
In the Gulf of Mexico, USA, we are encouraging
scientists to use Shell’s expertise and technology –
such as remotely-operated vehicles – to explore the
depths of the ocean. This collaboration between
academics and the deep-water oil and gas industry
has led to sightings of rarely seen sea creatures and
the discovery of what is thought to be a new
species of octopus.

CREATING GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
Green infrastructure is the term used to describe the
use of natural systems to complement man-made
infrastructure, an approach which typically makes
the overall system more resilient. We are looking
for ways to integrate natural systems into the
design of our projects. In some cases, natural
systems could be used as part of climate change
adaptation strategies by governments, businesses
or communities.

External opinion
“Shell has contributed to UNEPWCMC’s Proteus Partnership for
more than 13 years, supporting the
development and accessibility of
valuable biodiversity information. Shell
has made good progress integrating
biodiversity data into operational
decisions by screening for critical
habitats and implementing biodiversity
management plans. But there is always
room for improvement.
Our research shows there are overlaps
between hydrocarbon resources and
areas that the conservation community
considers important for biodiversity.
This will make securing social licence
to operate increasingly challenging.
The energy industry needs to place
a greater emphasis on the value of
nature, economic or otherwise, in its
decision-making. This would enable a
more nuanced approach to developing
resources in areas which require
sensitive management of the social
and environmental impacts and risks.”

Dr Jon Hutton

Former director, UNEP-World
Conservation Monitoring Centre
(WCMC), Cambridge, UK

“

OUR PERFORMANCE
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

In Louisiana, USA, a Shell-funded programme,
operated by the Coalition to Restore Coastal
Louisiana, organised the collection of hundreds of
tonnes of oyster shells from local restaurants to help
rebuild oyster reefs and restore the state’s coastline.
Louisiana is home to 40% of the USA’s wetlands,
and a natural habitat for oysters. The oysters clump
together to form reefs, which trap sediment and
help create shallow marshes and estuaries. These
are the nurseries for one of the country’s largest
commercial fisheries and refuge for more than
5 million migratory birds. The reefs also help
shield homes, businesses and ports from storms
on Louisiana’s coast.

MANAGING WATER

The availability of fresh water is a growing
challenge in some regions of the world. At Shell, we
know that it is important to preserve this valuable
resource and manage our water use responsibly.
Water constraints tend to affect people at the local
or regional level, so we tailor our use of fresh
water to local conditions.
In water scarce areas, we develop water management
plans. These plans describe the long-term risks to
water availability and define measures to minimise
our use of fresh water or prescribe alternatives to
fresh water, such as recycled water, processed
sewage water and desalinated water. Waste water
from our operations is treated before discharge into
the environment. Where appropriate, we look for
ways to treat waste water using natural solutions such
as constructed wetlands. This helps us to reduce the
energy use associated with water management.
Our technology centre in Bangalore, India, is home to
our water research laboratories. It is also a hub that
connects Shell’s water experts around the world

so that they can share their experience. The centre
works in collaboration with leading universities,
non-governmental organisations and global
technology firms such as Wetsus, one of the top
water research organisations in the Netherlands.
A focus of this work is on the development of
advanced technologies to increase recycling
and reuse rates.
Shell is also involved in a number of working groups
with different organisations, such as the World
Business Council for Sustainable Development and
IPIECA, the global oil and gas industry association
for environmental and social issues. In these groups
we share experiences and encourage the adoption
of common practices across the industry. In 2012,
we published an accounting methodology for water
used in oil and gas operations, in co-operation
with the University of Utrecht.

SPILLS

Shell has clear requirements and procedures in
place to prevent operational spills. We have routine
programmes to maintain our facilities and pipelines,
and improve their reliability, in order to reduce
operational spills. However, spills still occur for
reasons such as operational failure, accidents or
unusual corrosion. (See page 36).

AIR EMISSIONS

We track emissions released into the atmosphere from
our upstream and downstream facilities and work to
reduce air pollution from our operations. This includes
making investments to lower our emissions of
nitrogen oxides, sulphur oxides and volatile organic
compounds that are released during oil and gas
production and processing. These pollutants can
affect air quality in the areas where we operate.

In Louisiana, USA, a Shell-funded programme organised the collection of oyster shells
to help restore parts of the state’s eroded coastline.

DECOMMISSIONING
AND RESTORATION

Decommissioning is an intrinsic part of the life
cycle of any asset and must be done safely
and responsibly when the asset reaches the
end of its life. When we decommission a
well pad, for example, we safely seal the
well, remove the production equipment and
reinstate the land. We use expertise from
the decommissioning industry to help us with
this work. However, as with much of the oil
and gas industry, some of our more complex
decommissioning projects take place offshore.
Our largest decommissioning activity, to date,
is for the Brent oil and gas field which lies in
the North Sea between Scotland and Norway.
The preparation for the decommissioning of
the four Brent field platforms started more than
eight years ago. It has involved consultation
with more than 180 interested parties and
an independent review group to validate
Shell’s decision-making process. In 2014,
Shell submitted a recommendation to the UK
regulator to decommission the topside of
one Brent platform in a single lift – the largest
ever attempted offshore – and transport it
onshore for recycling. These plans have
been approved.
In 2015, we took a further step to sharpen
our focus on decommissioning by forming a
team within Shell to improve safety, increase
efficiency, reduce cost and meet environmental
and stakeholder requirements for these projects.
The team will work with the industry to identify
best practice and enhance technologies for
decommissioning our wells and facilities
responsibly and efficiently.

35

OUR PERFORMANCE

36

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ENVIRONMENT CONTINUED
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE

We improved or maintained our environmental
performance across most areas during 2015.
This was due to operational improvements as well
as reduced activity and divestments. Details about
our environmental performance are provided below
and on pages 27 and 28 for methane and flaring.

Spills

The number of operational oil spills in 2015 was
108, down from 153 in 2014. The volume of
operational spills of oil and oil products increased
to 0.8 thousand tonnes, from 0.7 thousand tonnes
in 2014.
The number of spills caused by sabotage and theft
fell to 94 from 139 in 2014. The volume of these
spills decreased to 2.2 thousand tonnes in 2015
from 2.7 thousand tonnes in 2014. In 2015,
sabotage and oil theft remained a significant cause
of spills in the Niger Delta, Nigeria. See pages 24
and 25 for more information on spills in Nigeria.
The reduction in spills was in part due to divestments.
We investigate and learn from all spills to improve
our performance and we clean up the areas near
our operations that are affected by spills, irrespective
of the cause. As of the end of March 2016, there
were two spills under investigation in Nigeria that
may result in adjustments.

Water use

Our facilities are designed and run to help minimise
their use of fresh water, particularly in areas of
water scarcity. In 2015, the amount of fresh water
we used decreased to 186 million cubic metres
from 199 million cubic metres in 2014. More
than three-quarters of our fresh water use was
for manufacturing oil products and chemicals.
Our Upstream operations accounted for almost
a quarter of our total fresh water use.

Energy efficiency

One of the ways we can manage our direct
GHG emissions is to work on improving the energy
efficiency of the facilities we operate. The main
metric that we use to measure our energy efficiency
is energy intensity (the amount of energy consumed
for every unit of output).
In 2015, the overall energy intensity for the
production of oil and gas in our Upstream business
(excluding oil sands and gas-to-liquids) improved
slightly compared with 2014. This was partly
due to divestments of unconventional assets
in the USA and Canada.
All our major upstream facilities have
energy-management plans in place to make
the best use of those facilities, including the use
of improved field management techniques.

We have changed our reporting methodology
to align with the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
This has involved updating the way we calculate
the global warming potential (GWP) of the
greenhouse gases we emit. GWP compares
the impact of emissions from greenhouse gases
with the impact of emissions from the equivalent
amount of CO2. This update has increased our
reported GHG emissions (on a CO2 -equivalent
basis) by around 0.5 million tonnes.
The reasons for our overall decrease in
GHG emissions were as follows:
■■

divestments, including unconventional assets
in North America, some operations in Nigeria
and the Geelong refinery in Australia;

■■

operational improvements across many assets;

■■

overall reduction in flaring (see page 28);

In our oil sands operations, energy intensity
improved from 6.3 gigajoules for every tonne
of production in 2014 to 5.8 gigajoules in 2015.
The overall energy intensity for the manufacture
of oil products at our refineries worsened, from
94.9 refinery energy index in 2014 to 95.4 in
2015. This was mainly due to more unplanned
production shutdowns at several refineries.
The methodology for calculating the energy
intensity of our chemical plants was updated
in 2015; therefore data for preceding years is
not directly comparable and have not been
recalculated. Based on the new methodology,
the comparable result for 2014 was 90.7,
compared with 90.4 which was originally
calculated. The increase to 91.6 in 2015 was
mainly due to unplanned equipment shutdowns
at our chemical plant in Moerdijk. (To read more
about our energy efficiency, see page 15).

DIRECT GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS

GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
The direct GHG emissions from facilities
that we operate were 72 million tonnes on
a CO2 -equivalent basis in 2015, down from
76 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent in 2014.

We expect it will be more difficult in future to
maintain the energy-efficiency levels of recent
years, as existing fields age and new production
comes from more energy-intensive sources.
This may increase our upstream energy intensity
over time.

■■

■■

start-up of Quest CCS in Canada’s oil sands
(see page 19); and
shutdown of multiple units at our Moerdijk
chemical plant in the Netherlands.

Around 45% of our GHG emissions came
from the refineries and chemical plants in
our Downstream business. The production
of oil, gas and gas-to-liquids products in
our Upstream business accounted for around
50% of our GHG emissions, and our shipping
activities for less than 3%. We continue to work
on improving operational performance and
energy efficiency to reduce GHG emissions.
The indirect GHG emissions from the energy
that we purchased (electricity, heat and steam)
decreased to 9 million tonnes on a CO2 equivalent basis in 2015, from 10 million tonnes
in 2014. These emissions were calculated
using a market-based approach, as defined
by the World Resources Institute GHG Protocol.
We estimate that the CO2 emissions from the
use of our refinery and natural gas products
were around 560 million tonnes in 2015.

million tonnes CO2 equivalent
120
90
60
30
0

06 07 08 09 10

11

12

13

14

15

13

14

15

FRESH WATER WITHDRAWN
million cubic metres
300
200
100
0

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

OUR PERFORMANCE

37

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

Air emissions

Waste

We track emissions released into the atmosphere
from all our operations. Our sulphur oxides
emissions decreased from 97 thousand tonnes
in 2014 to 88 thousand tonnes in 2015. This
decrease was partly due to using fuel with lower
sulphur content in our shipping activities but was
partly offset by the higher sulphur content of the
crude oil processed by our refineries.

We aim to reduce the amount of waste we
generate and to reuse or recycle materials,
wherever possible. For example, in 2015,
five of our Downstream manufacturing sites
sent more than 75% of their waste generated
during the year off-site for recycling or reuse.
We track the amount of waste sent off-site
for disposal or recycling.

Our nitrogen oxides emissions decreased from
146 thousand tonnes in 2014 to 104 thousand
tonnes in 2015. The realignment of reporting
boundaries in 2015 to follow guidance from
IPIECA/API/IOGP, in part affected these numbers.
Our emissions of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) decreased to 125 thousand tonnes
in 2015 compared with 151 thousand tonnes
in 2014. This was mostly due to a reduction
of venting in Majnoon, Iraq. We expect
our VOC emissions to further decrease in
the coming years as a result of our efforts
to reduce flaring and venting.

SPILLS – OPERATIONAL [A]

ENERGY INTENSITY – REFINERIES

ENERGY INTENSITY – CHEMICAL PLANTS

refinery energy index [A]

chemicals energy index [A]
100

20

500

110

10

250

100

95
90
0

0

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

Volume in thousand tonnes

13

14

90

15

85

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

13

14

15

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

13

14

15

Number of spills

[A] Over 100 kilograms.

[A] Indexed to 2002; based on 2006 Solomon EIITM methodology.

[A] CEI calculation methodology changed in 2015; therefore,
data for prior years are not directly comparable.

SPILLS – SABOTAGE [A]

ENERGY INTENSITY – UPSTREAM

ENERGY INTENSITY – OIL SANDS

gigajoules/tonne production [A]

gigajoules/tonne production [A]
8

(EXCLUDING OIL SANDS AND GTL)

20

500

0.9

10

250

0.7

0

0.5

6
4
2
0

06 07

08 09 10

11

Volume in thousand tonnes

12

13

14

15

0

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

13

14

15

06 07

08 09 10

11

12

Number of spills

[A] Sabotage and theft-related spills over 100 kilograms.

[A] 2012-2015 data are reported in accordance with
IPIECA/API/OGP guidance 2010.

[A] Includes mining and upgrading operations.

13

14

15

38

OUR PERFORMANCE
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

WORKING WITH COMMUNITIES
Many of our operations are located close to communities. We work with communities to
understand their priorities and concerns. This is essential to our being a responsible company.
We engage with communities to identify how
we can avoid, minimise or mitigate any negative
impacts. This engagement also determines how
and where we can add sustainable benefits in
the form of employment, contract opportunities
and social investment programmes.
Our work with communities follows our health,
safety, security, environment and social
performance (HSSE & SP) Control Framework.
Our social performance teams, working closely
with our environmental teams, use the framework
to guide their work. It governs how we plan projects
and run operations. The framework recognises
international standards as a benchmark – such as
the environment and social performance standards
set by the International Finance Corporation.
Each major project and asset at Shell has a social
performance plan. This includes a summary of our
impacts on communities and the environment –
which are identified during the impact assessment
process – and the actions we take to address them.
(See page 9). We use indicators to monitor the
progress of our work in communities. The indicators
used are relevant to each local community and
may include monitoring spending on local goods
and services or measuring and categorising
community feedback.

LISTENING AND RESPONDING

We know that effective communication with
communities can help to both avoid and, if
necessary, remedy grievances. We ensure that
people in neighbouring communities are able
to express their views in a variety of ways,
including community meetings, surveys, community
advisory panels and employee hotlines.
Community liaison officers are employed to keep
people informed about the ways our operations
may affect them. They listen to the concerns of
people in the community so that those concerns
can be incorporated into our plans, whenever
appropriate. This approach was successfully
applied during our recent operations in Alaska
where we had an agreement with the Iñupiat
communities near the Chukchi Sea to inform
them daily of our activities to avoid disturbing
their hunting and fishing activities.
Shell has implemented community feedback
mechanisms at all major operations and projects
to receive, track and respond to questions and
complaints from community members. This enables
us to capture and resolve concerns quickly and
in a transparent and balanced manner.

A hydropower generator has been installed as part of a pilot project to bring electricity
to the indigenous Batak people. Palawan, the Philippines.

External opinion
“Shell is one of about ten new operators
who have recently entered into offshore
exploration in Myanmar. Our Centre
has been working with most of them
during an impact assessment we
conducted on oil and gas. This has
involved a number of multi-stakeholder
discussions on issues like environmental
impact assessment, community
engagement, community investment
and the Voluntary Principles on Security
and Human Rights.
It’s been important to have Shell in those
discussions to hear how international
standards can be applied in Myanmar.
They have, for example, shared with
us their field experience in community
consultations in Myanmar. Shell and
other multinationals are breaking new
ground by discussing the potential
impacts of their operations directly
with communities. Shell’s transparency
about successes and challenges with
civil society and others, can help to
overcome years of distrust of business
and build a better oil and gas industry
in Myanmar.”

Vicky Bowman

Director, Myanmar Centre
for Responsible Business,
Yangon, Myanmar

“

OUR PERFORMANCE
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

WORKING IN SPECIALIST AREAS

Some projects require specialist social performance
expertise on topics such as indigenous peoples,
cultural heritage or resettlement. (See page 43).
In these cases, our relevant specialists will support
the project teams to interpret and apply local and
international standards that protect community rights.
In Iraq’s Basra province, we were assessing potential
sites for the proposed Nebras petrochemical
complex. When our team visited an initially
proposed site, we discovered a children’s cemetery
that had not been documented. The proposed site
was also used to access fishing grounds. These
factors held significant weight in the final assessment
of site options. As a result, an alternative site was
identified as the preferred option for the project.
In some cases, our operations require temporary
or permanent access to areas of land or sea where
people are living or working. We first try to avoid
the need to resettle people. In circumstances where
this cannot be avoided, we work closely with local
communities and governments to help people
relocate and to restore their livelihoods. In some
situations, even where physical relocation is not

ACCESS TO ENERGY

Energy is crucial to economic and social
development, and improves the livelihoods of
people across the world. Globally, more than 1.1
billion people are without access to electricity –
and a billion more only have access to unreliable
and unsafe power networks. Nearly 3 billion
people rely on solid fuels for cooking. For many
in the world, better access to energy could help
people out of poverty: it affects their health,
education and their ability to earn a living.
At Shell, we apply our core business skills
and technical resources to help enable access
to energy for communities in regions where
the need is great and we have a presence.
In countries such as Iraq and Nigeria, we
supply natural gas that was previously flared
for domestic power generation. As part of our
social investment programme, Shell Philippines,
through the Pilipinas Shell Foundation, funded
a micro-grid that uses hydropower and solar
energy to power an indigenous village in
Palawan, the Philippines. It provides the local
Batak tribe with a constant supply of electricity.
The smoke emitted from traditional or inefficient
cookstoves poses severe health risks. Shell is
the largest private-sector partner of the Global
Alliance for Clean Cookstoves, which works
to encourage a global market for clean and
efficient household cookstoves and fuels in
developing countries. Shell offers both financial
and in-kind support to the Alliance and its grant
facility, the Spark Fund.

necessary, our operations may affect people’s
livelihoods – for example, by limiting access to
their land. In these cases, we will support people
to restore or establish alternative livelihoods.
In Sichuan province, China, for example, we
partnered with the non-governmental organisation,
Mercy Corps, to assist 150 smallholder farmers
who were affected by our operations. We
worked with the farmers to help them improve their
agricultural practices, manage their businesses
better, and identify markets for selling their
produce. In the early stages of the project, 83%
of the farmers reported increased knowledge
of farming techniques, while 40% had improved
their agricultural practices or adopted new
farming technologies.

INVESTING IN COMMUNITIES

Investing in communities where we operate –
what we call social investment – is an important
part of being a good neighbour. Most of our
social investment is at country and community
level. Our businesses tailor their social investment
strategy to the communities’ needs, while working
to a common global vision and framework.

ENCOURAGING
LOCAL ENTERPRISE

The need to develop local enterprise, skills
and jobs is one of the most common topics
raised by local communities. Shell has many
programmes in place to support and encourage
the building of new businesses and generate
local employment. Our LiveWIRE programme
helps entrepreneurs turn their ideas into long-term
sources of income. The programme was extended
to Malaysia in 2015 and is active in 15 countries
where we operate. In 2015, more than 8,000
people took part in LiveWIRE and small business
development programmes and more than
90 businesses were established.
We further support communities by offering
training for jobs in the oil and gas industry. For
example, in Argentina, we are working with the
mayor of San Patricio del Chañar on two local
training initiatives. One programme trains adults
to work in the welding and electrical trades; the
other prepares students for specific jobs in the
energy industry, such as working on a drilling
rig or inspecting equipment.

Shell has three core themes of social investment
in areas that are closely connected to our business:
enabling access to energy, improving road safety,
and enabling employment within communities.
Local Shell teams determine which social investment
themes are relevant to the community and design
programmes accordingly, working within a common
framework for measuring social and business
outcomes. (See box). Social investment teams also
have the freedom to implement locally-tailored
programmes for community development, education,
biodiversity and conservation in response to local
needs. We also partner whenever possible with
other businesses, development agencies and
non-governmental organisations to implement
our programmes.
Our global framework enables us to measure
the impact of our social investment programmes
in terms of positive outcomes for the community
as well as achievement of our business goals.
Our social performance teams also work closely
with our contracting and procurement organisation
to encourage local procurement of goods
and services, contributing to local or regional
economic development. (See page 40).

ROAD SAFETY

The promotion of road safety awareness among
people in local communities is another focus
area of our social investment projects. In southern
Iraq, for example, near our Majnoon operations,
we work with the AMAR International Charitable
Foundation to train local health staff and women
safety volunteers to raise awareness among
parents and children about road safety. We
are also working with authorities in education,
government and the police to set up road safety
zones around primary schools and build speed
bumps, new footpaths and warning signs.
We are a board member of the Global Road
Safety Partnership (GRSP), a global alliance that
brings together governments, civil society and
businesses to improve road safety. Shell chairs
the Global Road Safety Initiative, a private sector
collaboration with GRSP that works to improve
road safety in cities and communities. It operates
in eight countries and its “Safe to School –
Safe to Home” programme focuses on helping
children to travel safely to and from school.
(See more on our road safety work on page 32).

39

OUR PERFORMANCE

40

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

WORKING WITH COMMUNITIES CONTINUED
SOCIAL PERFORMANCE

We have indicators in place that gauge our
relationship with communities near our operations.
We also measure our contribution to communities
through our social investment programmes and the
procurement of local goods and services within our
supply chain.

Community feedback

Shell uses data from our community feedback
mechanisms as a performance indicator at both
the local community and global levels. Community
complaints are registered in different categories to
identify common issues across Shell and share
knowledge on how they were resolved. In 2015,
the largest number of complaints received related
to social and environmental issues. These included
concerns about Shell´s allocation of its social
investment funds, the creation of local jobs and
the impact of our operations on people´s land,
property or livelihoods. Most environmental
complaints related to nuisances, such as noise,
odours or dust.

VOLUNTARY SOCIAL INVESTMENT
IN 2015
proportion of spend

Social investment

We invest in projects that aim to benefit local
communities over the long term. In 2015, we
completed our first assessment of the long-term
impact of our social investment projects globally.
In 2015, we spent around $122 million on
voluntary social investments worldwide (compared
with $160 million in 2014). Our social investment
is closely connected to the locations where we
operate and so portfolio changes can affect the
amount that we spend. This is the main reason for
the decrease in social investment in 2015. These
figures do not include investments that were part of
contractual agreements or legal requirements with
host governments, which was around $97 million.
Of the $122 million, we spent around $29 million
on our three global strategic themes of enterprise
development, road safety and energy access.
Around $93 million was spent on local programmes
for community development, disaster relief,
education, health and biodiversity. We estimate
that almost $43 million of our spend in 2015 was
in countries that are part of the UNDP Human
Development Index 2015, that is, those defined
as having a gross domestic product of less than
$15,000 a year per person. Significant support
is also provided in the form of voluntary work
by Shell employees and donations of equipment.

VOLUNTARY SOCIAL INVESTMENT
IN 2015

Local procurement

We prioritise buying goods and services from
local suppliers that meet the standards we require.
In some cases, we support local businesses
and skills development to meet these standards.
In 2015, we spent more than $56.3 billion on
goods and services worldwide. Around 65%
of this was spent in Canada, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, the UK and the USA. We estimate
around $5.9 billion was spent in countries that
have a gross domestic product of less than
$15,000 a year per person. In these countries,
Shell companies spent more than 75% ($4.4 billion)
on goods and services from local companies.
We also check that our suppliers comply with
key sustainability criteria, including good working
conditions. In 2015, we conducted 10 assessments
of suppliers in Africa and the Middle East, 126
in the Americas, 129 in the Asia-Pacific region,
and 119 in Europe to check their compliance
with our Shell Supplier Principles. These principles
cover areas such as human rights, labour practices
(including those relating to child and forced labour)
and business integrity. (See page 46).

COMMUNITY COMPLAINTS IN 2015

split by region

3% 2%
11%

12%

9%

13%

8%

8%

4%

23%

8%

3%
10%

30%

58%

17%
21%
31%
29%

Enterprise development
Energy access
Road safety
Community development

Education
Biodiversity
Other

MENA
Europe
Asia Pacific
Africa
Americas
Russia and CIS
Asia
Global (various regions incl. Shell Foundation)

Local content, social investment and benefit sharing
Land, livelihood and property
Stakeholder engagement
Physical impacts

OUR PERFORMANCE

41

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

Shell Foundation
Shell Foundation (SF) is an independent charity
that applies a business approach to global
development challenges that constrain job
creation, access to energy and urban mobility.

To date, SF has deployed $207 million of grant
funding into social enterprises and new market
builders operating in Africa, Asia and Latin America.

Since 2000, SF has worked with social
enterprise partners to create new business
solutions to deliver social and environmental
improvement internationally. SF provides a mix
of business support, grant funding and market
links to help entrepreneurs prove their business
models, achieve financial independence
and expand into new markets.
Once a social enterprise partner is able to serve
low-income consumers on a commercial scale,
SF creates intermediary businesses and industry
associations. These support the growth of new
markets around the partner. For example, helping to
create the model for the Global Off-Grid Lighting
Association – an industry association that is
building market infrastructure for off-grid lighting
to reach low-income consumers.

In 2015, SF published an analysis of the successes
and failures of its work over the past 15 years in a
report entitled “Enterprise Solutions to 2030”. The
report collates the Foundation’s learnings from more
than 200 partnerships with public and private social
investors. It outlines a road map for co-ordinated
action to accelerate progress towards sustainable
development in emerging markets.

2015 social enterprise partner highlights
■■

d.light: a leading provider of low-cost, highquality solar energy products. Its expanded
product range includes the world’s most
affordable and reliable solar-powered lantern
that is sold for just $5;

■■

■■

■■

Envirofit: pioneer of high-quality, efficient
and affordable clean-cooking solutions.
More than 1 million clean cookstoves have
been sold so far, improving the lives of
5 million people in 45 countries;
Husk Power Systems (HPS): a rural utility
that generates low-cost electricity from waste
and solar power. In 2015, HPS launched
the world’s first combined solar and biomass
hybrid power plant to bring continuous
electricity to communities in rural India; and
GroFin: provider of finance and business
support to small- and medium-sized enterprises
to spur job creation in emerging markets. Last
year, the company launched a $100 million
fund backed by individual and business
investors to generate 47,000 jobs in Africa
by 2025.

For more information visit:
www.shellfoundation.org/2030

SHELL FOUNDATION’S SIX-STEP THEORY OF CHANGE

Market resources

FINANCIAL
SUSTAINABILITY

SF resources

MARKET
IMPACT

OPERATIONAL
BREAK-EVEN

PIONEER
IMPACT

$

SHELL FOUNDATION’S IMPACT TO DATE

55,165

10.3 million

jobs created

tonnes of carbon reduction

$

$5.3 billion

47.8 million

funding leveraged

livelihoods improved

Source: Shell Foundation.

$

WORKING
TOGETHER

All of the work we do around
the world requires working
collaboratively: with contractors,
suppliers, non-governmental
organisations and other businesses,
among many others. We work
together towards a number
of goals: to achieve operational
excellence, best practice on
sustainability issues and to
improve standards within the
energy sector.
Collaboration will be critical
to achieving a low-carbon
society. Government, business
and civil society need to work
together to design and support
practical solutions.
This section details our work
with many of our partners.

19%
Women in senior leadership positions

600,000
Training days for employees
and JV partners

216,000
Contractors working for Shell

Shell employees at the Bellanaboy Bridge
gas terminal at the Corrib natural gas
plant that started up in 2015. County
Mayo, Ireland.

WORKING TOGETHER
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

LIVING BY OUR PRINCIPLES
The core values of honesty, integrity and respect for people are reflected in our business
principles, which strictly govern the way we work.

OUR BUSINESS PRINCIPLES

The Shell General Business Principles detail
our responsibilities to shareholders, customers,
employees, business partners and society. They
set the standards for the way we conduct business,
with honesty, integrity and respect for people,
the environment and communities. We aim to do
business fairly, ethically and in accordance with
laws that promote and safeguard fair competition
between businesses. We do not tolerate the
direct or indirect offer, payment, solicitation or
acceptance of bribes in any form, including
facilitation payments.
All Shell companies and joint ventures that we
operate must conduct their activities in line with
our business principles. We also encourage
joint ventures we do not operate to apply
materially equivalent business principles.

Our Code of Conduct

All Shell employees, contractors and anyone
acting on behalf of Shell must follow the Code
of Conduct, which describes the behaviour Shell
expects of individuals. The Code of Conduct was
refreshed in 2015, making it easier for individuals
to identify potential risks associated with their roles.
All employees and contractors are required to
complete Code of Conduct training.
We encourage employees and contractors to
seek advice and report concerns of any potential
breaches, anonymously if they wish. Concerns
or allegations are investigated by specialists
within Shell and if a violation is confirmed, we
take appropriate action. This may involve serious
consequences, up to and including dismissal
or contract termination. We maintain a stringent
no retaliation policy to protect any person making
a good faith allegation.

Business integrity in our supply chain

The Shell Supplier Principles, along with specific
contractual clauses, set out our expectations for
suppliers and contractors to behave with business
integrity. (See page 46). Our risk-based due
diligence processes assess prospective suppliers
to determine whether they can meet our expectations.
We regularly engage with suppliers to reinforce
these principles, offer support to help them strengthen
their own practices, if needed, and to hold them
accountable for their performance.

HUMAN RIGHTS

We respect human rights and our approach
applies to all of our employees and contractors.
It is informed by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the core conventions of the International
Labour Organization (ILO), and the UN Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights. Respect
for human rights and provision of remedy are ways
in which we uphold our business principles.
We consult with international organisations,
companies, civil society and other relevant
bodies to understand and respond to current and
emerging human rights topics. (See page 45).
We collaborate closely with the Danish Institute of
Human Rights to assess and improve our approach
to human rights. We participate in IPIECA working
groups (the global oil and gas industry association
for environmental and social issues) to develop
guidance and implementation tools to improve
respect for human rights across the industry.
Our human rights approach focuses on four
key areas:

Communities

We assess and manage the potential environmental,
health and community impacts of our projects in line
with international standards, such as the International
Finance Corporation’s performance standards
on environmental and social sustainability. Our
community engagement mechanisms allow our
neighbours to raise any concerns about the impacts
of our activities and enable us to respond to those
concerns through credible and effective non-judicial
processes. These mechanisms are informed by,
and are important components of, the UN Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights.

Security

We aim to keep employees, contractors and facilities
safe, while respecting the human rights and security
of local communities. The Voluntary Principles on
Security and Human Rights (VPSHR) are implemented
across Shell and are included in our private security
contracts and our engagements with public security
forces. We conduct annual risk assessments in our
relevant operations and provide training to
employees and contractors.

Labour rights

We respect the principles of freedom of association,
the right to collective bargaining, non-discrimination
and equal opportunity, adequate conditions of
work, adequate remuneration and the elimination
of forced labour and child labour. We respect the
rights of our employees, contractors and suppliers
by working in alignment with ILO conventions
and the UN Global Compact.

Supply chain

We seek to work with contractors and suppliers who
are committed to acting in an environmentally and
socially responsible way. In line with our business
principles, the Shell Supplier Principles include
specific expectations for contractors and suppliers
concerning labour and human rights. (See page 46).

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

Our activities have the potential to affect
indigenous peoples who hold specific rights for
the protection of their cultures and traditional ways
of life. We consult and engage with indigenous
communities to understand how our activities may
impact their rights. (See page 38). Our approach
is to work with indigenous communities to find
ways to mitigate negative impacts and to help
neighbouring communities benefit from our activities.
We train our employees to understand how to work
and engage with indigenous peoples. And we
continue to work with IPIECA to develop a consistent
approach and best practice across the oil and gas
sector for free, prior and informed consent.

43

44

WORKING TOGETHER
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL PARTNERS
Shell has a long track record of working in partnership with environmental and development
organisations. These partnerships bring important insights to our work.
The aims of these partnerships vary from helping
to reduce our environmental impact, to improving
the quality of land around our operations and
implementing social investment programmes.
For example, we partner with organisations that
advise us on specific issues such as biodiversity
or human rights.

Protecting whales with IUCN

Shell has environmental partnerships with Wetlands
International, the International Union for Conservation
of Nature (IUCN), The Nature Conservancy (TNC)
and Earthwatch. Our environmental partners can
bring specific expertise to our projects in areas
such as biodiversity, while they can advance their
own scientific or conservation knowledge by
working on our projects.

Shell and IUCN have been working together since
2004 to minimise the impacts on western gray whales
at Shell’s joint-venture operations at Sakhalin, Russia.
Under the guidance of the Western Gray Whale
Advisory Panel – a panel of 13 prominent scientists
convened by IUCN – we have worked to reduce the
impacts that phases of our operations may have on
the whales and their habitat. In 2005, we rerouted
pipelines away from the whales’ feeding grounds. In
2015, Sakhalin Energy was the only energy company
operating at Sakhalin that had an IUCN independent
observer on their team implementing a seismic survey
monitoring and mitigation programme. The panel
will continue to examine the impact of oil and gas
development on the whales following a positive
review of its role in 2015.

Protecting the Arctic’s critical habitats
with Wetlands International

Mapping biodiversity and rehabilitating
coastlines with TNC

ENVIRONMENTAL PARTNERSHIPS

Wetlands International is working with Shell to
identify and assess critical habitats in the Arctic
regions. Wetlands International has developed a
tool that predicts the distribution of Arctic species.
The tool maps critical wetland habitats for species
in the Arctic, including migratory waterbirds and
endangered species. The information it generates
follows the International Finance Corporation’s
performance standards and will become part
of Shell’s standard biodiversity screening tools.
It has been used by our project teams to screen for
sensitive areas and to help manage and prevent
potentially adverse impacts on Arctic biodiversity.
We have been working with Wetlands International
since 2001 on projects that range from managing
biodiversity and water issues at our operations
in Iraq, Brunei and Canada to strengthening
sustainability practices with communities in Nigeria.

Shell and TNC have completed a pilot project
to map critical biodiversity in three watersheds of
the central Magdalena River Basin in Colombia –
a place of important environmental and cultural
significance. The results will be made publicly
available and will provide the energy industry
and the Colombian government with an
understanding of local biodiversity.
We have also been working with TNC to
develop a nature-based approach to reduce
the cost and rate of erosion along the pipelines
in the Louisiana coastal zone. This is done by
creating living shorelines with planted vegetation,
or creating oyster reefs to restore wetlands and
improve the resilience of the coastline. Over time,
the living shorelines will also enhance the local
flora and fauna.

Project Better World is a partnership with Earthwatch. Shell sponsors employees to work
on environmental research and conservation projects. Manitoba, Canada.

Employees participate in Earthwatch activities
Our employee volunteer partnership, Project Better
World, has been running for 18 years. As part
of this, Shell sponsors employees to work with
scientists and communities on environmental
research and conservation projects. This deepens
our employees’ understanding of sustainability in
areas such as climate change and habitat loss.
In another programme, Shell employees provide
mentoring to managers in organisations working
to preserve protected areas. To date, over
800 Shell employees have taken part in the
Earthwatch programmes.

COMMUNITY PARTNERS

We work with both international and communitybased organisations to address social issues close
to our operations. The benefits of these collaborations
can help meet a specific need within a community
– such as unemployment – and they can help
Shell to improve its own operational practices.
For example, the Danish Institute for Human Rights
provides guidance on the integration of human
rights into labour practices, procurement,
security and community issues.
Partnerships in specific countries help to build trust
and draw on local knowledge. For example, Shell
is working with the United Nations Development
Programme to expand and refurbish Al Jawadian
School in Al Dayr, near Basra in southern Iraq.
The partnership has also constructed four local
playgrounds so that children can play in safe
areas away from traffic. Another project in Iraq
has supported 13 local businesses – including
women entrepreneurs – with business training,
coaching and capital investment.
We also have a global partnership with Mercy
Corps, an international organisation that helps
people to recover from crises, build better lives
and transform their communities. In its first three
years, the partnership has focused on transforming
how companies and non-governmental organisations
can work together for mutual benefit. In Sichuan
province, China, for example, we are helping
smallholder farmers to improve their agricultural
practices and the way they manage their
businesses. (See Communities, page 38).

WORKING TOGETHER

45

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

COLLABORATIONS
Shell collaborates and works with different organisations around the world.
These relationships help us to build trust among a diverse range of stakeholders,
including non-governmental organisations.
We define collaboration to mean all forms
of working with organisations outside of Shell.
Collaborating with these different organisations
helps us to gain insight into our business and industry,
while the sharing of knowledge and experience
with others contributes to the continuous improvement
of practices. We participate in relevant sector
discussions, ranging from improving industry-wide
technical standards to reviewing ways to tackle
human rights abuses within the supply chain.
Some of the views of the organisations with which
we work may differ from our own. For example,
we may not always agree with their opinions on
topics, such as climate change. In these cases,
we make our views known within the organisation
and seek to influence their policy position.

However, we believe it is important to remain
involved with these organisations to do this,
particularly where we benefit from working together
in areas such as safety, the environment and human
rights. In our Carbon Disclosure Project submission,
we provide more information on organisations
with which we work but whose position on climate
change is not entirely consistent with our own.
We review this work to ensure the objectives
of these collaborations are being met and that
the relationships remain mutually beneficial.
The table shows some of the organisations that
we collaborate with globally on sustainability
and technology. Shell also works with many
local organisations in countries around the world.

COLLABORATIONS OVERVIEW

Environmental
sustainability
and climate
change

American Petroleum Institute (API)

■

Bonsucro

■

Canada’s Oil Sands Innovation Alliance (COSIA)

■

Center for Sustainable Shale Development (CSSD)

■

Danish Institute for Human Rights (DIHR)

Human rights
and social
responsibility

■

Technology and
innovation

Transparency
and governance

■

■

■
■
■
■

Energy Institute (EI)
Energy Transitions Commission (ETC)

Safety and
technical
standards

■

■

■

Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves

■
■

Global Business Initiative on Human Rights (GBI)
Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership (GGFR)

■
■

■

■

Global Road Safety Partnership (GRSP)

■

International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP)

■

International Audit Protocol Consortium (IAPC)

■

International Emissions Trading Association (IETA)

■

IPIECA (industry association for environmental and social issues)

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Network of Employers for Traffic Safety (NETS)

■

■

■

Roundtable for Responsible Soy (RTRS)

■

■

Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO)

■

■

UN Global Compact

■

■

Oil and Gas Climate Initiative (OGCI)

■

World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD)

■

■

■

■

■

46

WORKING TOGETHER
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS
In 2015, Shell spent $56.3 billion on goods and services from 52,000 suppliers globally.
Around 216,000 contractors worked to deliver Shell projects and help run our operations.
We seek to work with contractors and suppliers that
behave in an economically, environmentally and
socially responsible way, as stated in our Shell
General Business Principles. We have a set of
principles for our suppliers that provides a consistent
framework detailing what we expect. The Shell
Supplier Principles cover what is required from our
suppliers regarding business integrity, health and
safety, social performance, and labour and human
rights. These apply regardless of the business
environment in the oil and gas industry.
It is important that our suppliers have the
appropriate policies, principles and standards in
place within their own company. Building strong
relationships with our suppliers is essential to
delivering our projects, running our operations and
ensuring suppliers place the same importance on
health, safety, the environment and community
impact as we do. In close collaboration with
suppliers and contractors, we work towards our
safety goal of no harm and no leaks at our sites.
Certain areas of our supply chain may pose a
higher labour rights risk, due to their location and
the nature of the goods and services we procure.
Of all assessments carried out for compliance with
our supplier principles in 2015, 384 suppliers were
subsequently awarded contracts. The number of
assessments follows our risk-based approach and
is dependent on the level of project activity and
the number of new contracts awarded throughout
the year. If gaps are identified, we sometimes work
with our suppliers and contractors to help them
understand how to close these gaps. We also work
closely with specific suppliers – such as those in
developing countries – to help them develop the
right skills, policies and management systems.

A successful example of this is the VIP Car Rental
company in Iraq (see external opinion).

LOOKING AFTER OUR WORKFORCE
During 2015, as part of our global worker welfare
programme, we implemented our Accommodation
and Welfare Guide, which was published in
2014. This provides tools and management
guidance for providing safe, secure and comfortable
accommodation for workers who are away from
home and sometimes in remote areas – whether
their needs are physical, mental, cultural or social.
This guidance is applied at a number of new
Shell ventures.

External opinion

Shell contributes to economic development in the
countries where we operate – either by employing
people directly or through our partners, such as
government or business partners. At the outset
of a project, we consider how we can employ
local suppliers and individuals. If needed, we help
them build capabilities that meet our safety and
quality standards. We also support the growth
of local businesses in many countries where we
work (we refer to these efforts as local content).
(See page 40).

By working closely with the SIPD
logistics team, we are able to quickly
solve issues so that we can provide the
services needed by SIPD in a safe and
timely manner.

In many countries, a local content plan forms part
of the bid criteria against which potential suppliers
are assessed. For example, a global supplier to
Shell partnered with an independent First Nations
company to form The Bouchier Carillion Group,
in line with the plan included in the bid. They provide
facilities management services to Shell in Alberta,
Canada. This partnership enables The Bouchier
Carillion Group to use its global experience and
support regional initiatives, particularly those focused
on aboriginal youth and women in business.

We work in close collaboration with our suppliers and contractors to meet our safety
and environmental standards.

“The VIP Car Rental company provides
passenger transport services for Shell
Iraq Petroleum Development (SIPD) in
the Majnoon area of southern Iraq.
We are proud to be a supplier to a
global company like Shell.

We are a fully-owned Iraqi company,
managing one of the highest risk
activities in Iraq. Local driving habits are
tolerable at best, but with the support
of SIPD, we have successfully driven
2 million km and achieved two years
of operations without injury. We have
also scored 100% in Shell’s road safety
and driver assessment programme.
In future, we recommend that Shell
works closely with the local police
to improve road security between
Basra and Majnoon.”

Sabah Alkhazrahej
General Manager,
VIP Car Rental
Basra, Iraq

“

WORKING TOGETHER
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

JOINT VENTURES
We often work in joint ventures with national and international energy companies.
All of our business partners bring important skills and experiences to a joint venture.
When we operate a joint venture (JV), Shell’s health,
safety, security, environment and social performance
(HSSE & SP) Control Framework is applied, as well
as the Shell General Business Principles and the
Shell Code of Conduct. (See page 43).

NON-OPERATED VENTURES

More than half of Shell’s JVs are non-operated
ventures. For these ventures, our Shell JV
representatives and the Shell-appointed JV board
directors encourage our partners to apply similar
standards and principles as our own.
When these JVs implement our Control Framework,
or a similar approach, we offer to support them
by assuring the JV’s compliance. We also offer
to review the effectiveness of the framework’s
implementation, overseen by the JV’s Board
of Directors.

If there is no such assessment, we periodically
evaluate the health, safety, environment and
community risks of the JV. If the JV is falling
below expectations, plans will be put in place,
in agreement with the other partners, to
improve performance.

LEARNING FROM EACH OTHER

Another advantage of working with our business
partners – who are often located in different parts
of the world – is that they offer an opportunity
to share knowledge and insights and learn from
each other’s experience. As a result we can work
together to create better solutions that tackle specific
social, environmental, safety or technical challenges.
For example, in Russia, our JV, Salym Petroleum
Development (Shell interest 50%), has developed
competence in social performance. It conducts
structured and regular community engagements
and applies a social impact assessment process.

Its key priority areas with communities where
it operates are education, healthcare and the
development of small businesses.
The Brunei Shell Petroleum JV (Shell interest 50%)
used our HSSE & SP Control Framework to
carry out an assessment of the effects on the
local ecosystem from using 3D seismic surveying.
The assessment surveyed offshore and onshore
areas in Brunei. Measures were put in place to
reduce the impact of seismic surveying, including
a biodiversity action plan that was created
with Wetlands International to protect and
conserve critical habitats, such as Brunei’s
peat swamp forests.
In Brazil, our biofuels JV, Raízen, adopted Shell’s
Goal Zero approach to implement safe practices
across all its businesses, with the aim of achieving
no incidents. In one crop year, Raízen recorded
a 37% reduction from the previous year in the
frequency of incidents that could have prevented
employees from working. (See page 31).

OUR PEOPLE
The quality of our people is essential to the success of our company. In 2015, we employed
an average of 93,000 employees in more than 70 countries.
We work to maintain a productive and healthy
organisation, resource talented people across the
business, accelerate development of our people,
grow and strengthen our leadership capabilities,
and enhance employee performance through
strong engagement.

OUR WORKFORCE

Around 40% of our workforce is in countries
outside of Europe and North America. In 2015,
we recruited around 1,000 graduates and 1,500
experienced professionals. Close to 40% of our
graduate recruits came from universities outside
of Europe and the Americas.
Shell manages the effects of business changes on
people as consistently as possible. Affected employees
are supported in their search for alternative employment
as appropriate by country law and policy.

COMMUNICATION
AND ENGAGEMENT

We strive to maintain healthy relations with our
employees. Dialogue between management
and employees is integral to our work practices
and takes place directly and, where appropriate,
through employee representative bodies.
Management briefs employees on operational
and financial results regularly through a variety of
channels. The annual Shell People Survey is one

of the principal tools used to measure employees’
views on a range of topics. For example, the
average employee engagement score in 2015
was 80% favourable and 5% unfavourable
(both the same as 2014). The survey also measures
employees’ views on the inclusiveness of their
workplace. In 2015, 71% felt positive about this,
while 11% felt negative about inclusion in the
workplace, the same figures as 2014.
We promote the safe expression and reporting
of views about our processes and practices.
We offer multiple channels for employees to
report, confidentially and anonymously, breaches
of the Shell General Business Principles or our
Code of Conduct, or other concerns.

DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION

Embedding the principles of diversity and inclusion
in the way we do business gives us a better
understanding of the needs of our stakeholders.
We provide equal opportunity in recruitment,
career development, promotion, training and
reward for all employees regardless of gender,
ethnicity, sexual orientation or physical ability.
We actively monitor diversity: at a global level,
we measure representation of women and
local nationals in senior leadership positions.
We have a talent development process to
bring about more diverse representation.

At the end of 2015, the proportion of women in
senior leadership positions was 19% compared
with 18% in 2014. The representation of senior
local nationals is monitored in 20 principal
countries. We measure the percentage of senior
nationals employed in Shell compared with the
number of senior positions in their home country.
The reporting shows two categories: local national
coverage greater than 80% (12 countries in 2015)
and less than 80% (eight countries in 2015).

TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT

In 2015, we invested about $335 million in
training and development, providing more than
600,000 training days for our employees and
joint-venture partners. We focused on growing our
leadership capability, improving skills in technical,
safety and commercial areas, and our expertise
in specialist areas such as cultural heritage
and indigenous peoples.

CODE OF CONDUCT VIOLATIONS

Shell employees and contractors must abide by
our Code of Conduct. Violations can be reported
through a variety of local channels, which are
adapted to local regulations and customs, and
one global channel, which is a dedicated helpline
operated by an independent provider. In 2015,
from the incidents reported through the global
helpline, 217 were confirmed as Code of Conduct
violations after investigation (267 in 2014). As a
result, we dismissed or terminated the contracts
of 89 employees and contractors (118 in 2014).

47

48

WORKING TOGETHER
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
During 2015, significantly lower oil and gas prices challenged our industry, with an average
Brent price of $52 a barrel. Our integrated business and improved operational performance
helped reduce the impact of lower energy prices.

$12

BILLION

Dividends distributed

We are managing our business through the current
oil price downturn which underpins our intention to
continue to pay attractive dividends to shareholders
while investing for the future. In 2015, we reduced
our operating costs and capital spending; restructured
our upstream business, tight and shale gas, and oil
products; sold assets worth $20 billion in 2014–15;
and delivered new projects with substantial cash
flow potential.
Our income in 2015 was $1.9 billion, impacted
by significantly lower oil and gas prices during
the year. In 2015, the average Brent price was
$52, down 47% from 2014. We distributed
dividends of some $12 billion to our shareholders
of which $2.6 billion was taken in shares through
our scrip dividend programme.
We reduced our total capital investment to
$29 billion to reflect the falling oil price and
focused on progressing only the most competitive
projects, which will help to build and sustain our
business for the future. We completed divestments
of $5 billion from our non-core portfolio, including
proceeds from the USA’s midstream master limited
partnership. We also spent $1,093 million on
our research and development programme.
Shell generated $29.8 billion of cash flow from
its operating activities in 2015.

EXECUTIVE SCORECARD

In 2015, we started up our Corrib facility in
Ireland (Shell interest 45%) and Bonga Phase 3
(Shell interest 55%), off the coast of Nigeria.
Only the most competitive projects are going
ahead: in the same year, we took just four major
final investment decisions, three of which were in
Downstream. We also announced the cancellation
of the Alaska exploration project and Carmon
Creek heavy oil project and in early 2016,
we postponed the final investment decisions
on LNG Canada and Bonga South West.
Shell’s oil and gas production in 2015 was
3 million boe a day, down 4% from 2014.
Our sales of liquefied natural gas decreased
to around 22.6 million tonnes.

$30

BILLION

Cash flow from operating activities

$29

BILLION

Capital investment

Following the announcement of a recommended
offer in April 2015, Shell completed the acquisition
of BG Group plc in February 2016. This acquisition
will mark the start of a new chapter in Shell. It
rejuvenates Shell’s Upstream business by adding
more deep-water and integrated gas to our
portfolio. These are areas where Shell has
significant capabilities and technologies.
Shell is becoming a company that is more
focused on its core strengths, and more resilient
and competitive throughout the oil price cycle.

SCORECARD STRUCTURE

In 2015, sustainable development continued
to account for 20% of the company scorecard,
which helps determine the annual bonus levels
for all our employees, including members of
the Shell Executive Committee (EC).
In 2015, the EC’s sustainable development
measures were split evenly between Shell’s
safety and environmental performance. Our
environmental measures cover operational
spill volume, energy efficiency and use of fresh
water. From 2015, process safety Tier 1 events
were introduced as a new measure for safety,
with an equal weighting for personal safety.
These measures reflect Shell’s Goal Zero
ambition of no harm and no leaks.
Targets are set each year by the Board’s
Remuneration Committee, taking into account
performance over the past three years in
order to incentivise continuous and sustained
improvement. In 2015, our performance
was better than the target for all sustainable
development measures and was our strongest
result to date.

Liquefied natural gas sales 6%
Production
12%

Process safety
5%

50%

Safety
10%
Personal safety
5%

Refinery and chemical
plant availability 12%

20%

Sustainability
10%

Project delivery
20%
30%

Operational excellence
Cash flow from operating activities
Sustainable development

Oil sands water use 2%
Operation oil spill
volume 4%
Refinery energy
intensity 4%

WORKING TOGETHER
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

TAX AND TRANSPARENCY
Tax binds governments, communities and businesses together. Revenue transparency provides
citizens with important information to hold their government representatives accountable and
to advance good governance. Shell is committed to transparency.

$7.7

BILLION

Paid in income taxes around the world

Our operations generate revenue through taxes
and royalties for governments around the world.
In 2015, Shell paid more than $60.8 billion to
governments. We paid $7.7 billion in income taxes
around the world, and $2.7 billion in royalties.
We collected $50.4 billion in excise duties, sales
taxes and similar levies on our fuel and other
products on behalf of governments.

OUR APPROACH

For Shell, paying taxes in the countries where
we operate is about more than complying with the
law. It is about showing that extraction of natural
resources provides governments with an opportunity
to generate revenues, support economic growth
and enhance social development.
We comply with the tax laws wherever we
operate. We are transparent about our tax
payments to governments and we strive for an
open dialogue with governments. This approach
helps us to comply with both the letter and the
spirit of the laws.

Principles

In line with the Shell General Business Principles
we support a number of external voluntary codes,
which include the Organisation for Economic

Ben van Beurden, CEO, speaking at
the Shell Annual General Meeting in
May 2015. The Hague, The Netherlands.

Co-operation and Development (OECD) Guidelines
for Multinational Enterprises and the Business
and Industry Advisory Committee to the OECD
Statement of Tax Principles for International
Business.

Transparency

In 2012, we were one of the first companies to
voluntarily publish revenues that our operations
generate through income taxes, royalties and
indirect taxes for governments around the world.
From 2016 onwards, Shell will make mandatory
disclosures under the Reports on Payments to
Governments Regulations 2014, and will file its
Payments to Governments Report with the UK’s
Companies House. This report will be published
on our website www.shell.com/payments.

Tax strategy

$2.7

BILLION

Royalties paid to governments

$50

BILLION

Collected excise duties and sales tax

It is the right of governments to determine what a
fair share of tax is and to draft tax laws accordingly.
They do so against strong competition for capital
and investment, which is internationally mobile. It is
not the role of business to form views on what level of
taxation is fair. We use legitimate tax incentives and
exemptions designed by governments to promote
investment, employment and economic growth.

We provide the authorities with timely and
comprehensive information on potential tax issues.
In return, we receive treatment that is open, impartial,
proportionate, responsive and grounded in an
understanding of our commercial environment. This
approach improves the transparency of our tax affairs
and allows Shell to better manage its tax-related risks
throughout the life cycle of each project.

When considering the viability of investments, tax is
one of the factors we examine. Income tax is just
one part of the overall tax regime considered. We
expect to pay tax on our income in the country where
activities take place, and believe double taxation of
the same activity by different jurisdictions should be
avoided. Shell supports efficient, predictable and
stable tax regimes that incentivise long-term
investment. We expect the laws to be applied
consistently, creating a level playing field for all.

Transparency is only really effective if all parties in
a country follow the same disclosure standards.
Shell is a founder and board member of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).
Consistent with the EITI requirements, we continue
to advocate mandatory country-by-country global
reporting, as most tax payments are made at
the corporate level to national governments.
We support unified revenue reporting rules
and standards applicable to all multinationals,
irrespective of their ownership or place of business.

Governance of tax

Shell’s Board of Directors is responsible for
maintaining a sound system of risk management
and internal control, and for regularly reviewing its
effectiveness. This system also covers taxation, which
forms an integral part of the Shell control framework.
Annually, the Board conducts a review of the
effectiveness of Shell’s system of risk management
and internal control, including financial, taxation,
operational and compliance controls.

COLLABORATING WITH OTHERS

Shell supports co-operative compliance
relationships with tax authorities on the basis of the
framework proposed by the OECD Forum on Tax
Administration. We have a co-operative compliance
relationship in place in the UK, the Netherlands
and Singapore, and pilot relationships in Austria
and Italy.

Shell is actively involved in the revenue transparency
discussion and we are working with stakeholders to
develop an approach that takes into account the
views of the relevant stakeholders involved, i.e.
industry, governments and civil society.

49

DATA AND
REPORTING

Each year, we measure our
global performance and report
on the safety of our operations,
our impact on the environment and
our contribution to communities.
Our External Review Committee
assesses the report and offers
an objective view on our progress
in sustainability.
This section provides data on our
safety, environmental and social
performance for 2015, and an
opinion from the Committee.
Our office building in Singapore has been
certified to meet green building standards.

DATA AND REPORTING
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ABOUT OUR REPORTING
We began reporting voluntarily on our environmental and social performance with the first
Shell Report in 1997. We support transparency and share information and data in this report
and on our company website.
We also provide regular information to the Carbon
Disclosure Project, Dow Jones Sustainability Index,
FTSE4Good Index and other organisations that
assess the economic, environmental and social
performance of companies.

ABOUT OUR DATA

There are inherent limitations to the accuracy of
environmental and social data. We recognise that
our data will be affected by these limitations and
continue to improve data integrity by strengthening
our internal controls.
All non-financial data in this report are reported
on a 100% basis for companies and joint ventures
where we are the operator. Environmental data
pertain to our direct emissions unless otherwise
stated. We report in this way, in line with industry
practice, because these are the data we can
directly manage and affect through operational
improvements. We refer to the number of
people employed or contracted on a
“full-time equivalent” basis.
Operations acquired or divested during the year
are included only for the period of our ownership.
Our 2015 reporting does not include data from
BG Group. Other data are collected from external
sources, staff surveys and other internal sources
as indicated.
We only include data in this report that were
confirmed by the end of March 2016. If incidents
are reclassified or confirmed, or if significant data
changes occur after preparation of this report, they
will be updated in the following year’s publication.
Data marked in the social data table come from
an internal survey completed by the senior Shell
representative in each country. The accuracy of
environmental and social data may be lower than
that of data obtained through our financial systems.

ASSURANCE

We have clear standards and reporting requirements
for our health, safety, security, environment and
social performance data. This is supported by
internal controls such as audit trails and statistical
checks to help ensure the accuracy of the Shell
Sustainability Report.
The External Review Committee of independent
experts helps to make sure our reporting is balanced,
relevant and responsive to stakeholders’ interests.
Lloyd’s Register Quality Assurance Ltd has
provided limited assurance of our direct and
indirect greenhouse gas emissions data for 2015.
Limited assurance means nothing has come to
the auditor’s attention that would indicate that the
data are not correct.
Conversions into US and Canadian dollars are
based on the average exchange rates for 2015.

51

DATA AND REPORTING

52

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
Greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs)
Direct total GHGs (million tonnes CO2 equivalent) [A]
Carbon dioxide (CO2) (million tonnes)
Methane (CH4) (thousand tonnes)
Nitrous oxide (N2O) (thousand tonnes)
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) (tonnes)
Energy indirect total GHGs (million tonnes CO2 equivalent) [B]
Flaring
Flaring (Upstream) (million tonnes CO2 equivalent)
Flaring (Upstream) (million tonnes hydrocarbon flared)
Nigeria [C]
Rest of world [D]
Energy intensity
Upstream excl. oil sands and GTL (gigajoules per tonne production) [E]
Oil sands (gigajoules per tonne production) [F]
Refineries: Refinery Energy Index [G]
Chemical plants: Chemicals Energy Index
Acid gases and VOCs
Sulphur oxides (SOx) (thousand tonnes SO2)
Nitrogen oxides (NOx) (thousand tonnes NO2) [H]
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) (thousand tonnes)
Ozone-depleting emissions
CFCs/halons/trichloroethane (tonnes)
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) (tonnes)
Spills and discharges [I] [J]
Sabotage spills – volume (thousand tonnes) [K]
Sabotage spills – number [K]
Operational spills – volume (thousand tonnes)
Nigeria [L]
Rest of world
Operational spills – number
Nigeria [M]
Rest of world
Hurricane spills – volume (thousand tonnes)
Oil in effluents to surface environment (thousand tonnes)
Water
Fresh water withdrawn (million cubic metres)
Waste disposal
Hazardous (thousand tonnes)
Non-hazardous (thousand tonnes)
Total waste (thousand tonnes) [N]

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

72
68
119
1
18
9

76
73
126
1
16
10

73
71
120
1
17
10

72
69
93
1
23
9

74
71
133
1
22
10

76
72
128
2
23
9

69
66
127
2
25
9

75
72
126
2
23
n/c

82
79
119
2
28
n/c

88
85
124
2
24
n/c

11.8
3.5
0.9
2.6

13.0
3.8
1.3
2.5

7.4
2.1
1.1
1.0

7.7
2.3
1.5
0.8

10.0
3.4
2.0
1.4

10.4
3.6
2.4
1.2

7.8
2.6
1.9
0.7

8.8
2.8
2.3
0.5

9.7
3.4
2.5
0.9

14.3
4.8
3.7
1.1

0.83
5.8
95.4
91.6

0.87
6.3
94.9
90.3

0.89
6.5
95.6
89.8

0.83 0.75 0.74 0.76
6.6
6.4
6.8
6.6
98.4 100.8 101.8 102.2
91.7 90.8 89.3 92.0

0.74
6.4
98.9
93.0

0.78
5.7
98.6
92.6

0.78
5.3
98.4
92.5

88
104
125

97
146
151

99
156
89

113
147
89

136
146
129

139
159
147

141
142
126

175
150
130

212
145
148

233
154
185

0.0
8

0.0
6

0.0
8

0.0
8

0.0
12

0.0
21

0.4
24

1.4
26

0.6
27

0.3
35

2.2
94
0.8
0.2
0.7
108
16
92
0.0
1.0

2.7
139
0.7
0.3
0.4
153
38
115
0.0
0.9

2.2
157
0.9
0.4
0.5
174
31
143
0.0
1.0

3.3
137
2.1
0.2
1.9
207
37
170
0.0
1.0

1.6
118
6.0
5.3
0.7
211
64
147
0.0
1.3

3.0
112
2.9
0.7
2.2
195
32
163
0.0
1.6

14.0
95
1.4
0.3
1.1
275
37
238
0.0
1.5

6.5
115
8.8
7.1
1.7
275
42
233
0.0
1.7

3.4
197
3.5
1.6
1.9
392
52
340
0.0
1.6

1.9
123
3.9
1.4
2.5
465
41
424
0.0
1.8

186

199

198

203

209

202

198

224

235

n/c

455
1,680
2,135

529
770
820
740 1,048
962
688
907
716
1,674 2,065 2,295 1,850 1,079 1,139
996 1,899 1,154
2,203 2,835 3,115 2,590 2,127 2,101 1,684 2,806 1,870

[A] Greenhouse gas emissions comprise carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride. The data are calculated using locally regulated methods where they exist.
Where there is no locally regulated method, the data are calculated using the 2009 API Compendium, which is the recognised industry standard under the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard.
There are inherent limitations to the accuracy of such data. Oil and gas industry guidelines (IPIECA/API/IOGP) indicate that a number of sources of uncertainty can contribute to the overall uncertainty of a corporate
emissions inventory. 2015 emissions are calculated using Global Warming Potential factors from the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report. Data for prior years were calculated using Global Warming Potential factors from
the IPCC’s Second Assessment Report.
[B] These emissions were calculated using a market-based approach in line with the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard.
[C] Nigeria includes SPDC onshore operations (0.8 million tonnes flared in 2015) and SNEPCo offshore operations (0.1 million tonnes flared in 2015).
[D] Flaring from the Majnoon field in Iraq and from Malaysia amounted to 1.4 and 0.6 million tonnes of hydrocarbons respectively in 2015.
[E] Since 2012 data are prepared in accordance with IPIECA/API/IOGP guidance 2010. Data for prior years are not directly comparable.
[F] The data include mining and upgrading operations. The data do not include in-situ production.
[G] Data are indexed to 2002, based on Solomon Associates Energy Intensity Index 2006 methodology.
[H] Decrease in NOx emissions in 2015 was partially driven by the realignment of reporting boundaries with the IPIECA/API/IOGP guidance.
[I] All spill volumes and numbers are for spills over 100 kilograms. Due to the rounding of numbers, spill volumes for Nigeria and rest of world might not add up to the exact total volume of spills.
[J] As of the end of March 2016, there were two spills under investigation in Nigeria that may result in adjustments.
[K] All sabotage- and theft-related spills have occurred in Nigeria except in 2015 (0.005 thousand tonnes outside Nigeria), 2007 (0.7 thousand tonnes outside Nigeria) and 2006 (0.6 thousand tonnes outside Nigeria).
[L] Nigeria includes SPDC onshore operations and SNEPCo offshore operations. A single spill at the Bonga field offshore Nigeria amounted to 4.8 thousand tonnes in 2011.
[M] Nigeria includes SPDC onshore operations (15 operational spills in 2015) and SNEPCo offshore operations (one operational spill in 2015).
[N] In 2015, we sent waste offsite for recycling or reuse, or sold close to 500 thousand tonnes of material that would otherwise have been disposed of as waste.
n/c = not calculated.

DATA AND REPORTING

53

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

SOCIAL AND SAFETY DATA
SOCIAL AND SAFETY DATA
Fatalities
Total number
Employees
Contractors
Fatal accident rate (FAR)
Fatalities per 100 million working hours (employees and contractors)
Injuries and process safety incidents
Total recordable case frequency (TRCF)
Injuries per million working hours (employees and contractors)
Lost time injury frequency (LTIF)
Lost time injuries per million working hours (employees and contractors)
Operational Process Safety Events
Tier 1 [O]
Tier 2 [O]
Illnesses
Total recordable occupational illness frequency (TROIF)
Illnesses per million working hours (employees only)
Security
Using armed security (% of countries)
Using armed company security (% of countries)
Using armed contractor security (% of countries)
Gender diversity [P]
In supervisory/professional positions (% women)
In management positions (% women)
In senior leadership positions (% women)
Staff forums and grievance procedures
% countries with staff access to staff forum,
grievance procedure or other support system
Child labour (% countries with procedures in place)
Own operations
Contractors
Suppliers
Forced labour (% countries with procedures in place)
Own operations
Contractors and suppliers
Integrity
Code of Conduct violations [Q]
Contracting and procurement
Estimated expenditure on goods and services in lower-income countries
($ billion) [R] [S]
Social investment [T]
Estimated voluntary social investment (equity share) ($ million)
Estimated social investment spend (equity share) in lower-income
countries ($ million) [U]

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

7
1
6
1.11

5
3
2
0.74

5
0
5
0.79

8
3
5
1.32

6
1
5
0.96

12
0
12
1.56

20
1
19
2.3

26
2
24
3.4

21
1
20
3.1

37
2
35
5.6

0.94

0.99

1.15

1.26

1.24

1.23

1.4

1.8

1.9

2.1

0.26

0.28

0.36

0.34

0.36

0.35

0.4

0.6

0.7

0.8

51
169

57
194

65
246

91
308

n/c
n/c

n/c
n/c

n/c
n/c

n/c
n/c

n/c
n/c

n/c
n/c

0.60

0.96

0.77

0.51

0.66

0.76

0.6

1.2

1.5

1.8

19
1
8

24
1
10

19
3
8

17
0
10

14
1
9

9
1
6

17
1
10

17
1
9

16
2
12

15
2
9

28.0
20.0
19.0

29.0
21.0
18.2

28.8
18.8
17.2

28.1
18.2
16.2

27.3
17.6
16.6

26.3
17.0
15.3

26.4
16.1
14.0

24.7
15.3
13.6

24.6
17.7
12.9

23.2
16.2
11.6

100

100

100

100

99

100

99

100

100

99

100

100

100

100

100

99

98

100

100

100

100

100

97

96

97

99

99
98
96

95
89
82

100
100

100
100

100
100

100
100

100
97

99
95

98
89

n/c
n/c

n/c
n/c

n/c
n/c

217

267

181

209

226

205

165

204

361

n/c

6

14

12

14

12

13

12

12

13

10

122

160

159

149

125

121

132

148

170

140

43

73

74

67

45

61

54

61

65

n/c

[O] Process safety events are classified based on guidance from the IOGP and API. In 2015, there were 28 Tier 1 and 17 Tier 2 sabotage related events.
[P] Diversity data obtained from our human resources system.
[Q] Code of Conduct violations represent the number of reported incidents in the Shell Global Helpline (excluding queries or customer service queries), which have been investigated and closed during the relevant
period and where allegation was found to be (at least partially) true.
[R] Estimated expenditure in countries where gross domestic product amounts to less than $15,000 a year per person (source: UNDP Human Development Index 2015). In 2015, the UNDP index update no longer
includes some of the countries in which Shell invests, which impacts on our reported spend amount.
[S] From 2013 onwards, this figure only includes the amount spent on goods and services by Shell group companies.
[T] Social investment spending varies from year to year depending on business climate, locations and type of activities under way. This is voluntary social investment and does not include social investments made
through contractual agreements with host governments, voluntary work by Shell employees and donations of equipment.
[U] Estimated voluntary social investment spending in countries where gross domestic product amounts to less than $15,000 a year per person (source: UNDP Human Development Index 2015). As the countries
included in the UNDP index change, this affects our spend numbers. In 2015, the UNDP index update no longer includes some of the countries in which Shell invests, which impacts on our reported spend amount.
Social investment and contracting and procurement data collected via our financial system since 2007.
Data obtained from an internal survey completed by the senior Shell representative in each country.
n/c = not calculated.

DATA AND REPORTING

54

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

EXTERNAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
External Review Committee:
(clockwise from centre front)

3

4
2

5
1

6
7

In 2005, Shell established an External Review Committee (ERC) to help evaluate the quality
and credibility of the annual sustainability report and to recommend improvements to our
sustainability performance.
Members of the ERC come from a range of
professional backgrounds, but they share the
following expertise and experience:
■■

■■

■■

■■

■■

globally respected, independent, pragmatic
in their approach;
familiar with, and able to convey, the
perspectives of Shell stakeholder groups
or are experts in the main sustainability
challenges that Shell faces;
broadly representative of regions of strategic
importance to Shell;
reasonably familiar with the oil and gas industry,
Shell, and related sustainability issues; and
capable of adding fresh perspectives to
Shell’s thinking and reporting on sustainability.

Committee members are asked to serve for three
years, with two or three new members appointed
each year. This is long enough to develop the
necessary understanding of the issues and process,
without diminishing the independence or external
perception of independence critical to the ERC’s
effectiveness. The intention is that the Committee
should bring a balance of experience and
perspectives.

ERC RECOMMENDATIONS IN 2014
Each year, the ERC is asked to present its
independent opinion on the Shell sustainability
report. Below is an example of some of the
recommendations included in the ERC’s letter
in the Shell Sustainability Report 2014 and
Shell’s response. The ERC recommendations
have been fundamental in shaping this
current report. (See table).

ERC RECOMMENDATIONS AND OUR RESPONSES
ERC recommendation in 2014
The ERC would like to see Shell disclose how the energy
transition will further impact the company’s business
strategy, influence its targets and determine its future actions.
The ERC believes the report should more clearly describe
how Shell’s methane emissions compare to the studies
performed, and the plans Shell has in place to reduce its
methane emissions.
In Nigeria, Shell´s efforts to reduce theft and sabotage
are clearly described in the report and demonstrate the
company´s commitment to improve operational standards,
even in a challenging context. The ERC encourages Shell
to further disclose its progress in this area.

How Shell responded in the 2015 report
A dedicated section describing Shell’s
view and actions in relation to the energy
transition has been introduced.
We have included more detail on our
efforts to reduce our methane emissions
and on our progress in reducing flaring.
A summary of our progress is included on
the different aspects of spill remediation.
It also highlights the safety and security
challenges that our employees face,
which slows the pace of this work.

Pages
10 to 21

27 and 28

24 and 25

1. Seema Arora (Chair), Executive Director,
Confederation of Indian Industry, India
2. John Gardner, Vice President and Chief
Sustainability Officer, Novelis Inc, UK
3. Reidar Kvam, Global Lead, Social sustainability
and standards, World Bank, Norway
4. Lavinia Hollanda, Head of Research,
FGV Energia, Brazil
5. Mark Brownstein, Vice President, Climate
and Energy Program, Environmental Defense
Fund, USA
6. Ed Whittingham, Executive Director,
Pembina Institute, Canada
7. Bernice Lee, Head of Climate Change
and Resource Security Initiatives,
World Economic Forum, Hong Kong

REVIEW PROCESS

The Committee meets in person three times annually
(in The Hague, the Netherlands), and on other
occasions by teleconference. It holds meetings
with Shell senior management, including Shell’s
Executive Committee, to discuss Shell’s approach
to sustainability and our reporting. When reviewing
the sustainability report, the ERC focuses on three
main questions:
■■

■■

■■

Has Shell selected the most important topics for
the report?
How well has the report dealt with these topics
and responded to stakeholder interests?
Has Shell provided sufficient information and
access for the ERC to do its job effectively?

This review does not include the verification of
performance data in the sustainability report, or the
information on which the case studies in the report
are based. Separately, the ERC provides Shell with
its observations on the company’s strategy and
sustainability performance.
To acknowledge the ERC’s time and expertise
an honorarium is offered, payable either to the
individual members, their organisation or their
charity of choice. They are also offered
reimbursement for their expenses.

DATA AND REPORTING
SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

ERC OPINION
The External Review Committee (ERC or the Committee) is pleased to share its independent
opinion on Shell’s 2015 Sustainability Report (the report).
The ERC recognises that the report has improved
considerably compared with previous years in both
tone and content, with significant improvements in
its structure, flow, design and readability. The ERC
believes the report covers the issues most relevant
to Shell and its stakeholders. It is helpful that the
2015 report includes a section summarising action
taken on some of the issues identified in the 2014
ERC letter.
The ERC’s engagement with Shell’s senior leadership
during the 2015 report cycle was well structured;
this has enabled the ERC to better understand
Shell’s current thinking on its business strategy
and sustainability. The report more clearly reflects
the social and environmental challenges and
opportunities facing the energy industry than
in previous years, although the ERC feels there
is further room for improvement.

ENERGY TRANSITION
AND CLIMATE CHANGE

The report outlines Shell’s approach to the energy
transition and how it is preparing for the transition to
a lower-carbon world. In our view, the report does
not adequately convey the urgency of this transition
in light of the 2015 Paris Agreement to keep the
global temperature rise well below 2 °C above
preindustrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit it to
1.5 °C. The ERC encourages Shell to disclose more
precisely how its strategy aligns with this global
ambition and to provide more disclosure on Shell’s
thinking on the role of natural gas (and other fossil
fuels) beyond 2050.
In terms of technological choices, for example,
the report outlines Shell investments in carbon
capture and storage (CCS), transportation
alternatives based on hydrogen and biofuels,
and even renewables. Yet it is not clear whether
these efforts are being pursued with the urgency
and scale required to meaningfully shift Shell’s
operations in the timeframe implied by the
Paris Agreement.

on a CO2 -equivalent basis. The ERC also notes
that the oil and gas supply chain from production,
transmission and distribution is the largest industrial
source of these emissions. In light of Shell’s declared
strategy to increase its focus on natural gas, the ERC
believes that the report understates the magnitude of
the climate problem posed by methane and the risk
this represents to Shell. The report would benefit
from greater clarity on how managing methane
emissions and the related risks within its operations
are reflected in Shell’s business strategy.
In future reports, the ERC encourages Shell to
include more detail on improvements undertaken
in measuring and assessing emissions; the steps
required to reduce these emissions including
specific targets, and the role Shell is playing in
advancing legal and regulatory policies that
support methane reductions.

ALASKA

In recent years, the ERC has raised various questions
about Shell’s exploration work in Alaska, for
example, urging Shell to communicate how different
risk factors are considered in a balanced manner.
The 2015 report explains that the ultimate decision
to cease Alaska exploration was based on the
failure to find hydrocarbons. The report also
acknowledges the many challenges Shell
experienced in respect of Alaska operations over
the last few years, including the high operating
costs, increased opposition from environmental
groups and others, as well as the unpredictable
regulatory environment. The ERC thinks it would
help stakeholders to hear more about how the
different financial and non-financial risk factors were
considered over time and how the company will
apply learning from Alaska to ongoing investments
in the Arctic and other sensitive regions.

OIL SANDS

The ERC encourages Shell to more clearly
articulate short- and medium-term (up to five years)
and longer-term (five to 20 years) goals detailing
a robust and comprehensive low-carbon
transition strategy.

The ERC believes halting construction of the
Carmon Creek oil sands project warranted
additional explanation. Future reports might include
further discussions on the evaluation and balance
of technical and non-technical risks for controversial
activities such as oil sands development. This
could also include discussions on how Alberta’s
new oil sands emissions limits – which Shell publicly
supported – may impact Shell’s future operations.

NATURAL GAS AND METHANE

NIGERIA

The ERC welcomes the inclusion of a separate
section on methane and the description of Shell’s
actions to control these emissions. As cited in the
report, the IPCC estimates that methane makes up
about 20% of man-made greenhouse gas emissions

In 2015, Shell recorded seven fatalities in four
separate incidents in their Nigeria operations.
Once investigations are completed, the ERC urges
Shell to disclose the measures undertaken to
reduce the risk of future events.

The ERC appreciates the complexity of oil leak
clean-ups in Nigeria, but encourages Shell to be
more transparent in the timing of the remediation
programme committed to by the Shell Petroleum
Development Company of Nigeria joint venture
to implement the United Nations Environment
Programme report recommendations.

TARGETS AND GOALS

For several years, the ERC has encouraged Shell
to include sustainability targets and goals in its
reporting to demonstrate its long-term ambition
and corresponding management focus. The ERC
welcomes the inclusion of the new section on
reporting against aspirations in the 2015 report
which lists goals, performance and plans for 2016
and beyond. The ERC suggests that the report also
provides information on the process and the criteria
for selecting the reported aspirations, including their
standing in Shell’s materiality assessment. The ERC
suggests that future Shell reporting includes a more
comprehensive list of targets and goals, analysis
of performance trends and action taken where
performance is below target.

SOCIAL PERFORMANCE

The ERC acknowledges strong improvement in the
clarity of reporting on Shell’s social performance
in the 2015 report. For example, the report makes
a much clearer distinction between a rights-based
approach to risk management and providing
opportunities to local communities and other groups
than in the past. Also, the detail provided on Shell
community social investment efforts combines well
with descriptions of the work of the Shell Foundation,
providing a broader understanding of impact.
The ERC hopes to see continuing emphasis in the
report on this area, which can be strengthened
further with more robust indicators and data
related to social performance.

CONCLUSION

The Committee recognises the progress in the
2015 report, particularly the response to the ERC’s
recommendations from previous years. In future
reports, the ERC would like to see a more strategic
conversation on the role of fossil fuels as the world
pursues efforts to limit global warming to 1.5 °C,
and the challenges posed by volatility in the market
price of oil. In the 2016 Sustainability Report,
we anticipate commentary on the acquisition
of BG Group and how this will impact Shell’s
sustainability strategy.

55

DATA AND REPORTING

56

SHELL SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2015

LINKS
Following is a list of links to find more information about topics included in the sustainability report.

02

INTRODUCTION
Topic selection for 2015

04

About Shell

09

Embedding sustainability into projects

11

THE ENERGY TRANSITION
The energy future

14

Addressing climate change

16

Natural gas

18

Research and development

19

Carbon capture and storage (CCS)

20

Lower-carbon alternatives

24

MANAGING OPERATIONS
Our activities in Nigeria

26

Tight gas and oil

29

Oil sands

32

OUR PERFORMANCE
Safety

36

Environment

41

Shell Foundation

43

WORKING TOGETHER
Living by our principles

45

Collaborations

46

Contractors and suppliers

47

Joint ventures

47

Our people

49

Tax and transparency

51

DATA AND REPORTING
Our reporting

52/53 Environmental, social and safety data

An overview of our work in sustainability:
www.shell.com/sustainability
An overview of Shell’s business:
www.shell.com/about
Information about our impact assessment process:
www.shell.com/impactassessment
Our work in cleaner energy, future transport, cities and the Shell Scenarios:
www.shell.com/energyfuture
Shareholder resolution in 2015:
www.shell.com/ghg
Our natural gas story:
www.shell.com/naturalgas
Areas of innovation:
www.shell.com/innovatingtogether
Our CCS projects:
www.shell.com/ccs
Innovations in lower-carbon transport:
www.shell.com/futuretransport
For more information about work in Nigeria:
www.shell.com.ng
Shell’s onshore operating principles:
www.shell.com/operatingprinciples
Oil sands information on water use, recycling, reclamation and our work
with indigenous communities:
www.shell.ca/oilsands
Our approach to transport safety:
www.shell.com/roadsafety
Our greenhouse gas reporting:
www.shell.com/ghg
Shell Foundation’s Enterprise Solutions to 2030 report:
www.shellfoundation.org/2030
The Shell General Business Principles and Code of Conduct:
www.shell.com/values
Our Carbon Disclosure Project submission:
www.shell.com/ghg
Supplier qualification criteria:
www.shell.com/supplier/qualification
Our work with partners featured in the Shell magazine, Shell World Joint Ventures:
www.uae.shell.com/shellworldjointventure
Shell’s history and purpose:
www.shell.com/whoweare
Our Shell global helpline:
www.shell.com/globalhelpline
Our revenues for governments:
www.shell.com/payments
How we report our greenhouse gas emissions:
www.shell.com/ghg
Interactive data tables:
www.shell.com/performancedata

REPORT SPECIFICATIONS

The paper used for this report is Satimat Green, a Forest Stewardship Council® (FSC®) certified paper,
produced from 60% FSC-certified recycled fibre and 40% FSC-certified virgin fibre. All virgin fibres
are Elemental Chlorine Free bleached, without using chlorine gas. The inks used are vegetable
oil-based. The laminate used for the cover is eco-friendly and allows the report to be fully recycled.

carbon neutral
natureOffice.com | NL-215-168617

print production
Designed by Conran Design Group
Printed by Tuijtel under ISO 14001

SHARE YOUR OPINION

If you have any views on issues described
in this report, or on the report itself, please
email us at: sustainabilityreport@shell.com

REPORT ORDERING
order@shell.com

All our reports are available at
http://reports.shell.com

■■

■■

■■

Comprehensive financial information
on our activities throughout 2015
Detailed operational information
including maps
Report on our progress in contributing
to sustainable development

Download our apps at
www.shell.com/mobile_and_apps

■■
■■

Company news
Service-station locations

Check our latest news
@Shell

■■
■■

Follow @Shell on Twitter
www.facebook.com/shell

